I went and looked at a studio. Well, a
little office that I was going to turn
into a studio nearby, but it was not
good at all. It had drop ceilings, so I
could hear the guy in the office next to
me. You would be able to hear him
talking on episodes.
>> Third co-host.
>> Is it Howard?
>> No, it was like a lawyer. It seemed to
be like talking through some horrible
problem that I didn't want to listen to,
but I could hear every word.
>> Does he want millions of people
listening to this conversation?
>> Right.
>> All right.
>> All right. Let's do a podcast. Let's do
a podcast.
[Music]
>> Who got the truth? Now,
is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Sit me
down. Say it straight. Another story on
the way. Got the truth.
>> Welcome to the fall 2025 season of
Acquired, the podcast about great
companies and the stories and playbooks
behind them. I'm Ben Gilbert.
>> I'm David Rosenthal. and we are your
hosts. Here's a dilemma. Imagine you
have a profitable business. You make
giant margins on every single unit you
sell and the market you compete in is
also giant. One of the largest in the
world, you might say. But then on top of
that, lucky for you, you also are a
monopoly in that giant market with 90%
share and a lot of lock in.
>> And when you say monopoly, monopoly as
defined by the US government. That is
correct. But then imagine this. In your
research lab, your brilliant scientists
come up with an invention. This
particular invention when combined with
a whole bunch of your old inventions by
all your other brilliant scientists
turns out to create the product that is
much better for most purposes than your
current product. So you launched the new
product based on this new invention.
Right.
>> Right. I mean, especially because out of
pure benevolence, your scientists had
published research papers about how
awesome the new invention is and lots of
the inventions before also. So, now
there's new startup competitors quickly
commercializing that invention. So, of
course, David, you change your whole
product to be based on the new thing,
right?
>> Uh, this sounds like a movie.
>> Yes. But here is the problem. You
haven't figured out how to make this new
incredible product anywhere near as
profitable as your old giant cash
printing business. So maybe you
shouldn't launch that new product.
David, this sounds like quite the uh
dilemma to me. Of course listeners this
is Google today and in perhaps the most
classic textbook case of the innovators
dilemma ever the entire AI revolution
that we are in right now is predicated
by the invention of the transformer out
of the Google brain team in 2017. So
think open AI and chat GBT anthropic
NVIDIA hitting all-time highs all the
craziness right now depends on that one
research paper published by Google in
2017. And consider this. Not only did
Google have the densest concentration of
AI talent in the world 10 years ago that
led to this breakthrough, but today they
have just about the best collection of
assets that you could possibly ask for.
They've got a top tier AI model with
Gemini. They don't rely on some public
cloud to host their model. They have
their own in Google Cloud that now does
$50 billion in revenue. That is real
scale. They're a chip company with their
tensor processing units or TPUs, which
is the only real scale deployment of AI
chips in the world besides Nvidia GPUs.
Maybe AMD maybe, but these are
definitely the top two. Somebody put it
to me in research that if you don't have
a foundational frontier model or you
don't have an AI chip, you might just be
a commodity in the AI market. And Google
is the only company that has both.
>> Google still has a crazy bench of
talent. And despite ChatGpt becoming
kind of the Kleenex of the era, Google
does still own the textbox, the single
one that is the front door to the
internet for the vast majority of people
anytime anyone has intent to do anything
online. But the question remains, what
should Google do strategically? Should
they risk it all and lean into their
birthright to win in artificial
intelligence? Or will protecting their
gobs of profits from search hamstring
them as the AI wave passes them by? But
perhaps first we must answer the
question, how did Google get here? David
Rosenthal. So listeners, today we tell
the story of Google, the AI company.
>> Woo.
>> You like that, David? Was that good?
>> I love it. Did you hire like a Hollywood
script writing consultant without
telling me?
>> I wrote that 100% myself with no AI.
Thank you very much.
>> No AI.
>> Well, listeners, if you want to know
every time an episode drops, vote on
future episode topics or get access to
corrections from past episodes, check
out our email list. That's
acquired.fm/e.
Come talk about this episode with the
entire acquired community in Slack after
you listen. That's acquired.fm/slack.
Speaking of the acquired community, we
have an anniversary celebration coming
up. We do 10 years of the show. We're
going to do an open Zoom call with
everyone to celebrate. Kind of like how
we used to do our LP calls back in the
day with LPS. And we are going to do
that on October 20th, 2025 at 4:00 p.m.
Pacific time. Check out the show notes
for more details.
>> If you want more acquired, check out our
interview show, ACQ2. Our last interview
was super fun. We uh sat down with Toby
Lutka, the founder and CEO of Shopify,
about how AI has changed his life and
where he thinks it will go from here.
So, search ACQ2 in any podcast player.
And before we dive in, we want to
briefly thank our presenting partner JP
Morgan Payments.
>> Yes, just like how we say every company
has a story, every company's story is
powered by payments. And JP Morgan
Payments is a part of so many of their
journeys from seed to IPO and beyond.
>> So, with that, this show is not
investment advice. David and I may have
investments in the companies we discuss
and this show is forformational and
entertainment purposes only. David,
Google, the AI company.
>> So Ben, as you were alluding to in that
fantastic intro, really, you're really
up in the game here.
If we rewind 10 years ago from today,
before the Transformer paper comes out,
all of the following people, as we've
talked about before, were Google
employees. Ilia Sidskever, founding
chief scientist of OpenAI, who along
with Jeff Hinton and Alex Koschesky had
done the seinal AI work on Alexnet and
just published that a few years before.
All three of them were Google employees,
as was Daario Amade, the founder of
Anthropic,
Andre Karpathy, chief scientist at Tesla
until recently, Andrew Ing, Sebastian
Thrron, Nam Shazir, all the deep mind
folks. Demisabis, Shane Le, Mustafa
Sullean, Mustafa now, in addition to in
the past having been a founder of
DeepMind runs AI at Microsoft.
Basically,
every single person of note in AI worked
at Google with the one exception of Yan
Lun who worked at Facebook.
>> Yeah, it's pretty difficult to trace a
big AI lab now back and not find Google
in its origin story. Yeah, I mean the
analogy here is it's almost as if at the
dawn of the computer era itself, a
single company like say IBM had hired
every single person who knows how to
code. So it' be like you know if anybody
else wants to write a computer program
oh sorry you can't do that. Anybody who
knows how to program works at IBM. This
is how it was with AI and Google in the
mid2010s. But learning how to program a
computer wasn't so hard that people out
there couldn't learn how to do it.
learning how to be an AI researcher
significantly more difficult,
>> right? It was the stuff of very specific
PhD programs with a very limited set of
advisers and a lot of infighting in the
field of where the direction of the
field was going, what was legitimate
versus what was crazy heretical
religious stuff.
>> Yeah. So then yes, the question is how
do we get to this point? Well, it goes
back to the start of the company. I
mean, Larry Page always thought of
Google as an artificial intelligence
company. And in fact, Larry Page's dad
was a computer science professor and had
done his PhD at the University of
Michigan in machine learning and
artificial intelligence, which was not a
popular field in computer science back
then.
>> Yeah. In fact, a lot of people thought
specializing in AI was a waste of time
because so many of the big theories from
30 years prior to that had been kind of
disproven at that point, or at least
people thought they were disproven. And
so it was frankly contrarian for Larry's
dad to spend his life and career and
research work in AI.
>> And that rubbed off on Larry. I mean, if
you squint, page rank, the page rank
algorithm that Google was founded upon
is a statistical method. You could
classify it as part of AI within
computer science. And Larry, of course,
was always dreaming much much bigger.
here. I mean, there's the quote that
we've said before on this show in the
year 2000, 2 years after Google's
founding when Larry says artificial
intelligence would be the ultimate
version of Google. If we had the
ultimate search engine, it would
understand everything on the web. It
would understand exactly what you wanted
and it would give you the right thing.
That's obviously artificial
intelligence. We're nowhere near doing
that now. However, we can get
incrementally closer and that is
basically what we work on here. It's
always been an AI company.
>> Yep. And that was in 2000.
Well, one day in either late 2000 or
early 2001, the timelines are a bit hazy
here, a Google engineer named Gor Heric
is talking over lunch with Ben Gomes,
famous Google engineer who I think would
go on to lead search and a relatively
new engineering hire named Gnome Shazir.
Now, Gor was one of Google's first 10
employees, incredible engineer. And just
like Larry Paige's dad, he had a PhD in
machine learning from the University of
Michigan. And even when George went
there, it was still a relatively rare
contrarian subfield within computer
science. So, the three of them are
having lunch and George says
off-handedly to the group that he has a
theory from his time as a PhD student
that compressing data is actually
technically equivalent to understanding
it. And the thought process is if you
can take a given piece of information
and make it smaller, store it away and
then later reinstantiate it in its
original form. The only way that you
could possibly do that is if whatever
force is acting on the data actually
understands what it means because you're
losing information going down to
something smaller and then recreating
the original thing. It's like you're a
kid in school. You learn something in
school. You read a long textbook. You
store the information in your memory.
Then you take a test to see if you
really understood the material. And if
you can recreate the concepts, then you
really understand it.
>> Which kind of foreshadows big LLMs today
are like compressing the entire world's
knowledge into some number of terabytes
that's just like this smash down little
vector set. Little at least compared to
all the information in the world. But
it's kind of that idea, right? You can
store all the world's information in an
AI model in something that is like kind
of incomprehensible and hard to
understand. But then if you uncompress
it, you can kind of bring knowledge back
to its original form.
>> Yep. And these models demonstrate
understanding, right?
>> Do they? That's the question. That's the
question. They certainly mimic
understanding.
>> So this conversation is happening. You
know, this is 25 years ago. And Gnome,
the new hire, the, you know, young buck,
he sort of stops in his tracks and he's
like, "Wow, if that's true, that's
really profound."
>> Is this in one of Google's micro
kitchens?
>> This is in one of Google's micro
kitchens. They're having lunch.
>> Where did you find this, by the way? A
25-year-old
>> uh this is in in the Plex. This is like
a small little passage in Steven Levy's
great book that's been a source for all
of our Google episodes, In the Plex.
There's a small little throwaway passage
in here about this because this book
came out before ChatgBT and AI and all
that. So Gnome kind of latches on to
George and keeps vibing over this idea
and over the next couple months the two
of them decide in the most googly
fashion possible that they are just
going to stop working on everything else
and they're going to go work on this
idea on language models and compressing
data and can they generate machine
understanding with data and if they can
do that that that would be good for
Google. I think this coincides with that
period in 2001 when Larry Pageige fired
all the managers in the engineering
organization and so everybody was just
doing whatever they wanted to do.
>> Funny.
>> So there's this great quote from Gor in
the book. A large number of people
thought it was a really bad thing for
Nome and I to spend our talents on, but
Sanjay Gamat Sanjay of course being Jeff
Dean's famous prolific coding partner
thought it was cool. So George would
posit the following argument to any
doubters that they came across. Sanjay
thinks it's a good idea and no one in
the world is as smart as Sanjay. So why
should Nome and I accept your view that
it's a bad idea?
>> It's like if you beat the best team in
football, are you the new best team in
football no matter what?
>> Yeah. So all of this ends up taking
Noman George deep down the rabbit hole
of probabilistic models for natural
language. Meaning for any given sequence
of words that appears on the internet,
what is the probability for another
specific sequence of words to follow?
This should sound pretty familiar for
anybody who knows about LLM's work
today.
>> Oh, kind of like a next word predictor.
>> Yeah. Or next token predictor if you
generalized it.
>> Yep.
>> So, the first thing that they do with
this work is they create the did you
mean spelling correction in Google
search.
>> Oh, that came out of this. that came out
of this. Gnome created this.
>> So this is huge for Google because
obviously it's a bad user experience
when you mistype a query and then need
to type another one. But it's attacks to
Google's infrastructure because every
time these mistyped queries are going
well, Google's infrastructure goes and
serves the results to that query that
are useless and immediately overwritten
with the new one,
>> right? And it's a really tightly scoped
problem where you can see like, oh wow,
80% of the time that someone types in
god groomer. Oh, they actually mean dog
groomer and they retype it. And if it's
really high confidence, then you
actually just correct it without even
asking them and then ask them if they
want to opt out instead of opting in.
It's a great feature and it's sort of a
great first use case for this in a very
narrowly scoped domain.
>> Totally. So they get this win and they
keep working on it nomen and they end up
creating a fairly large I'm using large
in quotes here you know for the time
language model that they call
affectionately Phil the probabilistic
hierarchical inferential learner.
>> These AI researchers love creating their
uh backronyms.
>> They love their word puns.
>> Yeah.
>> Yep.
So fast forward to 2003 and Susan
Majiski and Jeff Dean are getting ready
to launch AdSense. They need a way to
understand the content of these third
party web pages, the publishers, in
order to run the Google ad corpus
against them. Well, Phil is the tool
that they use to do it.
>> Huh. I had no idea that language models
were involved in this.
>> Yeah. So Jeff Dean borrows Phil and
famously uses it to code up his
implementation of AdSense in a week
because he's Jeff Dean. And boom,
AdSense. This is billions of dollars of
new revenue to Google overnight because
it's the same corpus of ads that are
adwords that are search ads that they're
now serving on third party pages. They
just massively expanded the inventory
for the ads that they already have in
the system. Thanks to Phil. Thanks to
Phil. All right, this is a moment where
we got to stop and just give some Jeff
Dean facts. Jeff Dean is going to be the
throughine of this episode of Wait, how
did Google pull that off? How did Jeff
Dean just go home and over the weekend
rewrite some entire giant distributed
system and figure out all of Google's
problems? Back when Chuck Norris facts
were big, Jeff Dean facts became a thing
internally at Google. I just want to
give you some of my favorites. The speed
of light in a vacuum used to be about 35
mph. Then Jeff Dean spent a weekend
optimizing physics.
>> So good.
>> Jeff Dean's pin is the last four digits
of pi.
>> Only Googlers would come up with these.
>> Yes. To Jeff Dean, NP means no
problemmo.
>> Oh yeah, I've seen that one before. I
think that one's my favorite.
>> Yes.
>> Oh, man. So, so good. Also a wonderful
human being who we spoke to in research
and was very, very helpful. Thank you,
Jeff.
>> Yes. So, language models definitely
work, definitely going to drive a lot of
value for Google, and they also fit
pretty beautifully into Google's mission
to organize the world's information and
make it universally accessible and
useful if you can understand the world's
information and compress it and then
recreate it. Yeah, that fits the
mission. I think I think that checks the
box.
>> Absolutely. So Phil gets so big that
apparently by the mid 2000s Phil is
using 15% of Google's entire data center
infrastructure and I assume a lot of
that is AdSense ad serving but also did
you mean and all the other stuff that
they start using it for within Google.
>> So uh early natural language systems
computationally expensive.
>> Yes. So okay now mid 2000s fast forward
to 2007 which is a very very big year
for the purposes of our story. Google
had just recently launched the Google
translate product. This is the era of
all the great great products coming out
of Google that we've talked about. You
know maps and Gmail and docs and all the
wonderful things that Chrome and Android
are going to come later. They had like a
10-year run where they basically
launched everything you know of at
Google except for search truly in a
10-year run. And then there were about
10 years after that from 2013 on where
they basically didn't launch any new
products that you've heard about until
we get to Gemini, which is this
fascinating thing. But this 03 to 2013
era was just so rich with hit after hit
after hit,
>> magical. And so one of those products
was Google Translate. you know, not the
same level of user base or perhaps
impact on the world as Gmail or maps or
whatnot, but still a magical magical
product. And the chief architect for
Google Translate was another incredible
machine learning PhD named Fron O. So
Fran had a background in natural
language processing and machine learning
and that was his PhD. He was German. He
got his PhD in Germany at the time.
DARPA,
>> the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency, division of the government,
>> had one of their famous challenges going
for machine translation. So Google and
France of course enters this and France
builds an even larger language model
that blows away the competition in this
year's version of the DARPA challenge.
This is either 2006 or 2007. gets a
astronomically high blue score for the
time. It's called the bilingual
evaluation understudy is the sort of
algorithmic benchmark for judging the
quality of translations at the time,
higher than anything else possible. So
Jeff Dean hears about this and the work
that France and the translate team have
done and it's like this is great. This
is amazing. Uh when are you guys going
to ship this in production?
>> Oh, I heard this story.
>> So Jeff and Nome talk about this on the
Door Cash podcast. Yes,
>> that episode is so so good. And Fron is
like, "No, no, no, no, Jeffy, you don't
understand. This is research. This isn't
for the product. We can't ship this
model that we built. This is a n g
language model." Grams are like number
of words in a cluster. And we've trained
it on a corpus of two trillion words
from the Google search index. This thing
is so large it takes it 12 hours to
translate a sentence. So the way the
DARPA challenge worked in this case was
you got a set of sentences on Monday and
then you had to submit your machine
translation of those set of sentences by
Friday.
>> Plenty of time for the servers to run.
>> Yeah. They were like, "Okay, so we have
whatever number of hours it is from
Monday to Friday. Let's use as much
compute as we can to translate these
couple sentences.
Hey, learn the rules of the game and use
them to your advantage.
>> Exactly. So Jeff Dean being the
engineering equivalent of Chuck Norris,
he's like, let me see your code. So Jeff
goes and parachutes in and works with
the translate team for a few months. And
he rearchitects the algorithm to run on
the words and the sentences in parallel
instead of sequentially. Because when
you're translating a set of sentences or
a set of words in a sentence, you don't
necessarily need to do it in order. You
can break up the problem into different
pieces, work on it independently. You
can parallelize it
>> and you won't get a perfect translation,
but you know, imagine you just translate
every single word. You can at least go
translate those all at the same time in
parallel, reassemble the sentence and
like mostly understand what the initial
meaning was.
>> Yeah. And as Jeff knows very well
because he and Sanjay basically built it
with Zhoza, Google's infrastructure is
extremely parallelizable, distributed.
You can break up workloads into little
chunks, send them all over the various
data centers that Google has, reassemble
the projects, return that to the user.
>> They are the single best company in the
world at parallelizing workloads across
CPUs across multiple data centers.
>> CPUs. We're still talking CPUs here.
>> Yep. And Jeff's work with the team gets
that average sentence translation time
down from 12 hours to 100 milliseconds.
And so then they ship it in Google
Translate. And it's amazing.
>> This sounds like a Jeff Dean fact. Well,
you know, it used to take 12 hours and
then Jeff Dean took a few months with
it. Now it's a 100 milliseconds.
>> Right. Right. Right. Right. Right.
Right. So this is the first large I'm
using large in quotes here language
model used in production in a product at
Google. They see how well this works
like hm maybe we could use this for
other things like predicting search
queries as you type.
That might be interesting, you know, and
of course the crown jewel of Google's
business. That also might be interesting
application for this. The ad quality
score for Adwords is literally the
predicted click-through rate on a given
set of ad copy. You can see how an LLM
that is really good at ingesting
information, understanding it, and
predicting things based on that might be
really useful for calculating ad quality
for Google.
>> Yep. Which is the direct translation to
Google's bottom line.
>> Indeed. Okay. So, obviously all of that
is great on the language model front. I
said 2007 was a big year. Also in 2007
begins
the sort of momentous intersection of
several computer science professors
on the Google campus. So in April of
2007, Larry Page hires Sebastian Thrun
from Stamford to come to Google and work
first part-time and then full-time on
machine learning applications. Sebastian
was the head of sale at Stanford, the
Stanford artificial intelligence
laboratory. Legendary AI laboratory that
was big in the sort of first wave of AI
back in the ' 60s7s when Larry's dad was
active in the field then actually shut
down for a while and then had been
restarted and re-energized here in the
early 2000s. And Sebastian was the
leader, the head of sale.
>> Funny story about Sebastian, the way
that he actually comes to Google.
Sebastian was kind enough to speak with
us to prep for this episode. I didn't
realize it was basically an aqua hire.
He and some I think it was grad students
were in the process of starting a
company had term sheets from Benchmark
and Sequoia.
>> Yes.
>> And Larry came over and said, "What if
we just acquire your company before it's
even started in the form of signing
bonuses?"
>> Yes. Probably a very good decision on
their part. So sale, this group within
the CS department at Stanford, not only
had some of the most incredible, most
accomplished professors and PhD AI
researchers in the world, they also had
this stream of Stanford undergrads that
would come through and work there as
researchers while they were working on
their CS degrees or symbolic system
degrees or, you know, whatever it was
that they were doing as Stanford
undergrads. One of those people was
Chris Cox who's the chief product
officer at Meta. Yeah, that was kind of
how he got his start in
>> all of this and AI and obviously
Facebook and Meta are going to come back
into the story here in a little bit.
>> Wow.
>> You really can't make this up. Another
undergrad who passed through sale while
Sebastian was there was a young freshman
and sophomore who would later drop out
of Stanford to start a company that went
through Y Combinator's very first batch
in summer 2005.
>> I'm on the edge of my seat. Who is this?
>> Any guesses?
>> Uh Dropbox, Reddit. I'm trying to think
who else was in the first batch.
>> Oh, no. No. But way more on the nose for
this episode.
The company was a failed local mobile
social network.
>> Oh, Sam Alman looped.
>> Sam Alman.
>> That's amazing. He was at sale at the
same time.
>> He was at sale. Yep. As an undergrad
researcher.
>> Wow.
>> Wild, right? We told you that it's a
very small set of people that are all
doing all of this.
>> Man, I miss those days. Sam presenting
at the WWDC with Steve Jobs on stage
with the double popped collar, right?
>> Different time in tech.
>> Yeah, the double popped collar. That was
amazing. That was a vibe. That was a
moment. Oh, man. All right. So, April
2007, Sebastian comes over from sale
into Google, Sebastian Thread. And one
of the first things he does over the
next set of months is a project called
Ground Truth for Google Maps,
>> which is essentially Google Maps.
>> It is essentially Google Maps. Before
ground truth, Google Maps existed as a
product, but they had to get all the
mapping data from a company called Tel
Atlas.
>> And I think there were two. They were
sort of a duopoly. Navtech was the other
one.
>> Yeah. Navtech and Tel Atlas.
>> But it was this like kind of crappy
source of truth map data that everyone
used and you really couldn't do any
better than anyone else because you all
just use the same data.
>> Yep. It was not that good and it cost a
lot of money. Tell Atlas and Navtech
were multi-billion dollar companies. I
think maybe one or both of them were
public at some point then got acquired
but a lot of money lot of revenue.
>> Yep. And Sebastian's first thing was
street view, right? So he already had
the experience of orchestrating this
fleet of all these cars to drive around
and take pictures.
>> Yes. So then coming into Google, ground
truth is this sort of moonshot type
project to recreate all the tea atlas
data
>> mostly from their own photographs of
streets from street view. And they
incorporated some other data. There was
like census data they used. I think it
was 40 something data sources to bring
it all together. But ground truth was
this very ambitious effort to create new
maps from whole cloth.
>> Yep. And just like all of the AI and AI
enabled projects within Google that
we're talking about here works very very
well.
Huge win.
>> Well, especially when you hire a
thousand people in India to help you uh
sift through all the discrepancies in
the data and actually handdraw all the
maps. Yes, we are not yet in an era of a
whole lot of AI automation. So on the
back of this win with ground truth,
Sebastian starts lobbying to Larry and
Sergey. Hey, we should do this a lot. We
should bring in AI professors,
academics, I know all these people into
Google part-time. They don't have to be
full-time employees. Let them keep their
posts in academia, but come here and
work with us on projects for our
products. They'll love it. They get to
see their work used by millions and
millions of people. We'll pay them.
They'll make a lot of money. They'll get
Google stock and they get to stay
professors at their academic
institutions.
>> Win-winwin.
>> Win-winwin. So, as you would expect,
Larry and Sergey are like, "Yeah, yeah,
yeah, that's a good idea. Let's do that.
More of that." So, in December of 2007,
Sebastian brings in a relatively little
known machine learning professor from
the University of Toronto named Jeff
Hinton to the Google campus to come and
give a tech talk, not yet hiring him,
but come give a tech talk to, you know,
all the folks at Google and talk about
some of the new work, Jeff, that you and
your PhD and postoc students there at
the University of Toronto are doing on
blazing new paths with neural networks
>> and Jeff Hinton for anybody who doesn't
know the name now very much known as the
godfather of neural networks and really
the godfather of kind of the whole
direction that AI went in
>> modern AI
>> he was kind of a fringe academic
>> at this point in history I mean neural
networks were not a respected subtree of
AI
>> no totally not
>> and part of the reason is there had been
a lot of hype 30 40 years before around
neural networks that just didn't pan
out. So it was effectively everyone
thought disproven and certainly
backwater.
>> Yep. Then do you remember from our
Nvidia episodes my favorite piece of
trivia about Jeff Hinton.
>> Oh yes. That his grandfather
great-grandfather was George Bool.
>> Yep. He is the great great grandson of
George and Mary Bool who invented
Boolean algebra and Boolean logic
>> which is hilarious now that I know more
about this because that's the basic
building block of symbolic logic of
defined deterministic computer science
logic. And the hilarious thing about
neural nets is it's not it's not
symbolic AI. It's not I feed you these
specific instructions and you follow a
big if then tree. It is
non-deterministic. It is the opposite of
that field.
>> Which actually just underscores again
how sort of heretical this branch of
machine learning and computer science
was.
>> Right.
>> So Ben, as you were saying earlier,
neural networks not a new idea and had
all of this great promise in theory, but
in practice just took too much
computation to do multiple layers. You
could really only have a single or maybe
small singledigit number of layers in a
computer neural network up until this
time. But Jeff and his former postto a
guy named Yan Lun start evangelizing
within the community, hey, if we can
find a way to have multi-layered,
deep layered neural networks, something
we call deep learning, we could actually
realize the promise here. It's not that
the idea is bad. It's that the
implementation which would take a ton of
compute to actually do all the math to
do all the multiplication required to
propagate through layer after layer
after layer of neural networks to sort
of detect and understand and store
patterns. If we could actually do that,
a big multi-layered neural network would
be very valuable and possibly could
work.
>> Yes. Here we are now in 2007, mid200s.
Moore's law has increased enough that
you could actually start to try to test
some of these theories. Yep. So Jeff
comes and he gives this talk at Google.
It's on YouTube. You can go watch it.
We'll link to it in the show notes. This
is incredible. This is an artifact of
history sitting there on YouTube. And
people at Google, Sebastian, Jeff Dean,
and all the other folks who are talking
about, they get very, very, very excited
because they've already been doing stuff
like this with translate and the
language models that they're working
with. That's not using deep neural
networks that Jeff's working on. So
here's this whole new architectural
approach that if they could get it to
work would enable these models that
they're building to work way better,
recognize more sophisticated patterns,
understand the data better. Very, very
promising.
>> Again, kind of all in theory at this
point.
>> Yep. So Sebastian Throne brings Jeff
Hinton into the Google fold after this
tech talk. I think first as a consultant
over the next couple years and then this
is amazing. Later, Jeff Hinton
technically becomes an intern at Google.
Like that's how they get around the
>> That's correct.
>> part-time, full-time policies here.
>> Yep. He was a summer intern in somewhere
around 2011, 2012. And mind you, at this
point, he's like 60 years old.
>> Yes. So in the next couple years after
2007 here, Sebastian's concept of
bringing these computer science machine
learning academics into Google as
contractors or part-time or interns,
basically letting them keep their
academic posts and work on big projects
for Google's products internally goes so
well that by late 2009, Sebastian and
Larry and Sergey decided, hey, we should
just start a whole new division within
Google and it becomes Google X the
moonshot factory the first project
within Google X Sebastian leads himself
>> David don't say it don't say it
>> I won't say the name of it we will come
back to it later but for our purposes
for now the second project would be
critically important not only for our
story but to the whole world everything
in AI changing the entire world and that
second project is called Google Brain.
But before we tell the Google Brain
story, now is a great time to thank our
friends at JP Morgan Payments.
>> Yes. So today we are going to talk about
one of the core components of JP Morgan
Payments, their Treasury solutions. Now
treasury is something that most
listeners probably do not spend a lot of
time thinking about, but it's
fundamental to every company.
>> Yep. Treasury used to be just a back
office function, but now great companies
are using it as a strategic lever. With
JP Morgan Payments Treasury Solutions,
you can view and manage all your cash
positions in real time and all of your
financial activities across 120
currencies in 200 countries. And the
other thing that they acknowledge really
in their whole strategy is that every
business has its own quirk. So, it's not
a cookie cutter approach. They work with
you to figure out what matters most for
you and your business and then help you
gain clarity, control, and confidence.
So whether you need advanced automation
or just want to cut down on manual
processes and approvals, their real-time
treasury solutions are designed to keep
things running smoothly. Whether your
treasury is in the millions or billions,
or perhaps like the company we're
talking about this episode, in the
hundreds of billions of dollars.
>> And they have some great strategic
offerings like Payby Bank, which lets
customers pay you directly from their
bank account. It's simple, secure,
tokenized, and you get faster access to
funds and enhance data to optimize
revenue and reduce fees. This lets you
send and receive real-time payments
instantly just with a single API
connection to JP Morgan. And because JP
Morgan's platform is global, that one
integration lets you access 45 countries
and counting and lets you scale
basically infinitely as you expand. As
we've said before, JP Morgan Payments
moves $10 trillion a day. So scale is
not an issue for your business.
>> Not at all. If you're wondering how to
actually manage all that global cash, JP
Morgan again has you covered with their
liquidity and account solutions that
make sure you have the right amount of
cash in the right currencies in the
right places for what you need. So
whether you're expanding into new
markets or just want more control over
your funds, JP Morgan Payments is the
partner you want to optimize liquidity,
streamline operations, and transform
your treasury. To learn more about how
JP Morgan can help you and your company,
just go to jporggan.com/acquired
and tell them that Ben and David sent
you.
>> All right, David. So, Google Brain.
>> So, when Sebastian left Stanford
full-time and joined Google full-time,
of course, somebody else had to take
over sales. And the person who did is a
another computer science professor,
brilliant guy named Andrew Ing.
>> This is like all the hits.
>> All the hits. This is all the AI hits on
this episode.
So, what does Sebastian do? He recruits
Andrew to come part-time, start spending
a day a week on the Google campus. And
this coincides right with the start of X
and Sebastian formalizing this division.
So, one day in 2010, 2011 time frame,
Andrew's spending his day a week on the
Google campus and he bumps into who
else? Jeff Dean. And Jeff Dean is
telling Andrew about what he and Fron
have done with language models and what
Jeff Hinton is doing in deep learning.
Of course, Andrew knows all this. And
Andrew is talking about what he and Sale
are doing at Stanford. and they decide,
you know, the time might finally be
right to try and take a real big swing
on this within Google and build a
massive really large deep learning model
in the vein of what Jeff Hinn has been
talking about on highly paralyzable
Google infrastructure.
>> And when you say the time might be
right, Google had tried twice before and
neither project really worked. They
tried this thing called brains on Borg.
Borg is sort of an internal system that
they use to run all of their
infrastructure. They tried the Cortex
project and neither of these really
worked. So there's a little bit of scar
tissue in the sort of research group at
Google of are large-scale neural
networks actually going to work for us
on Google infrastructure. So the two of
them, Andrew Ang and Jeff Dean, pull in
Greg Curado, who is a neuroscience PhD
and amazing researcher who was already
working at Google. And in 2011, the
three of them launch the second official
project within X, appropriately enough,
called Google Brain. And the three of
them get to work building a really,
really big, deep neural network model.
>> And if they're going to do this, they
need a system to run it on. You know,
Google is all about taking this sort of
frontier research and then doing the
architectural and engineering system to
make it actually run.
>> Yes. So Jeff Dean is working on this
system on the infrastructure and he
decides to name the infrastructure
disbelief which of course is a pun both
on the distributed nature of the system
and also on of course the word disbelief
because
>> no one thought it was going to work.
>> Most people in the field thought this
was not going to work and most people in
Google thought this was not going to
work.
>> And here's a little bit on why and it's
a little technical but follow me for a
second. All the research from that
period of time pointed to the idea that
you needed to be synchronous. So all the
compute needed to be sort of really
dense happening on a single machine with
really high parallelism kind of like
what GPUs do that you really would want
it all sort of happening in one place so
it's really easy to kind of go look up
and see hey what are the computed values
for everything else in the system before
I take my next move. What Jeff Dean
wrote with disbelief was the opposite.
it was distributed across a whole bunch
of CPU cores and potentially all over a
data center or maybe even in different
data centers. So in theory, this is
really bad because it means you would
need to be constantly waiting around on
any given machine for the other machines
to sync their updated parameters before
you could proceed. But instead, the
system actually worked asynchronously
without bothering to go and get the
latest parameters from other cores. So
you were sort of updating parameters on
stale data. You would think that
wouldn't work. The crazy thing is it
did. Yes. Okay. So you've got disbelief.
What do they do with it now? They want
to do some research. So they try out can
we do cool neural network stuff? And
what they do in a paper that they
submitted in 2011 right at the end of
the year is I'll give you the name of
the paper first. building high-level
features using largecale unsupervised
learning. But everyone just calls it the
cat paper.
>> The cat paper.
>> You talk to anyone at Google, you talk
to anyone in AI, they're like, "Oh yeah,
the cat paper." What they did was they
trained a large nine layer neural
network to recognize cats from unlabeled
frames of YouTube videos using 16,000
CPU cores on a thousand different
machines. And listeners, just to like
underscore how seminal this is, we
actually talked with Sundar in prep for
the episode. And he cited seeing the cat
paper come across his desk as one of the
key moments that sticks in his brain in
Google's story.
>> Yeah. A little later on, they would do a
TGIF where they would present the
results of the CAT paper and you talk to
people at Google, they're like, "That
TGIF, oh my god, that's when it all
changed."
>> Yeah. It proved that large neural
networks could actually learn meaningful
patterns without supervision and without
labeled data. And not only that, it
could run on a distributed system that
Google built to actually make it work on
their infrastructure. And that is a huge
unlock of the whole thing. Google's got
this big infrastructure asset. Can we
take this theoretical computer science
idea that the researchers have come up
with and use disbelief to actually run
it on our system? Yep, that is the
amazing technical achievement here. That
is almost secondary to the business
impact of the CAT paper. I think it's
not that much of a leap to say that the
cat paper led to probably hundreds of
billions of dollars of revenue generated
by Google and Facebook and by dance over
the next decade.
>> Definitely pattern recognizers in data.
So, YouTube
had a big problem at this time, which
was that people would upload these
videos, and there's tons of videos being
uploaded to YouTube, but people are
really bad at describing what is in the
videos that they're uploaded. And
YouTube is trying to become more of a
destination site, trying to get people
to watch more videos, trying to build a
feed, increase dwell time, etc., etc.
And the problem is the recommener is
trying to figure out what to feed and
it's only just working off titles and
descriptions that people were writing
about their own videos,
>> right? And whether you're searching for
a video or they're trying to figure out
what video to recommend next, they need
to know what the video is about.
>> Yep. So the CAT paper proves that you
can use this technology, a deep neural
network running on disbelief
to go inside of the videos in the
YouTube library and understand what they
were about and use that data to then
figure out what videos to serve to
people.
>> If you can answer the question, cat or
not a cat, you can answer a whole lot
more questions, too.
>> Here's a quote from Jeff Dean about
this. We built a system that enabled us
to train pretty large neural nets
through both model and data parallelism.
We had a system for unsupervised
learning on 10 million randomly selected
YouTube frames. As you were saying, Ben,
it would build up unsupervised
representations based on trying to
reconstruct the frame from the highle
representations. We got that working and
training on 2,000 computers using 16,000
cores. After a little while, that model
was actually able to build a
representation at the highest neural net
level where one neuron would get excited
by images of cats. It had never been
told what a cat was, but it had seen
enough examples of them in the training
data of head-on facial views of cats
that that neuron would then turn on for
cats and not much else. It's so crazy. I
mean, this is the craziest thing about
unlabelled data, unsupervised learning,
that a system can learn what a cat is
without ever being explicitly told what
a cat is and that there's a cat neuron.
>> Yeah. And so then there's a iPhone
neuron and a San Francisco Giants neuron
and all the things that YouTube
recommends,
>> not to mention porn filtering, explicit
content filtering,
>> not to mention copyright identification
and enabling revenue share with
copyright holders. Yeah, this leads to
everything in YouTube. Basically puts
YouTube on the path to today becoming
the single biggest property on the
internet and the single biggest media
company in the planet. This kicks off a
10-year period from 2012 when this
happens until Chat GPT on November 30th,
when AI is already shaping the human
existence for all of us and driving
hundreds of billions of dollars of
revenue. It's just in the YouTube feed
and then Facebook borrows it and they
hire Yan Lun and they start Facebook AI
research and then they bring it into
Instagram and then Tik Tok and Bite
Dance take it and then it goes back to
Facebook and YouTube with reals and
shorts. This is the primary way that
humans on the planet spend their leisure
time for the next 10 years.
>> This is my favorite David Rosenthalism.
Everyone talks about 2022 onward as the
AI era. And I love this point from you
that actually for anyone that could make
good use of a recommener system and a
classifier system, basically any company
with a social feed, the AI era started
in 2012.
>> Yes, the AI era started in 2012 and part
of it was the cat paper. The other part
of it was what Jensen at NVIDIA always
calls the big bang moment for AI, which
was AlexNet.
>> Yes. So, we talked about Jeff Hinton
back at the University of Toronto. He's
got two grad students who he's working
with in this era. Alex Kreseky and Ilia
Sutskyver,
>> of course,
>> future co-founder and chief scientist of
OpenAI. And the three of them are
working with Jeff's deep neural network
ideas and algorithms to create an entry
for the famous imageet competition in
computer science.
>> This is Fe Lee's thing from Stanford.
>> It is a annual machine vision algorithm
competition. And what it was was FFE had
assembled a database of 14 million
images that were handlabeled. Famously,
she used Mechanical Turk on Amazon, I
think, to get them all handlabeled.
>> Yes. And I think that's right. And so
then the competition was what team can
write the algorithm that without looking
at the labels, so just seeing the images
could correctly identify the largest
percentage, the best algorithms that
would win the competitions
year-over-year. We're still getting more
than a quarter of the images wrong. So
like 75% success rate, great. Way worse
than a human.
>> Can't use it for much in a production
setting when quarter the time you're
wrong. So then the 2012 competition
along comes Alex Net its error rate was
15%. Still high but a 10% leap from the
previous best being a 25% error rate all
the way down to 15 in one year. A leap
like that had never happened before.
>> It's 40% better than the next best.
>> Yes.
>> On a relative basis.
>> And why is it so much better, David?
What did they figure out that would
create a $4 trillion company in the
future?
>> So, what Jeff and Alex and Ilia did is
they knew like we've been talking about
all episode that deep neural networks
had all this potential and Moors law
advanced enough that you could use CPUs
to create a few layers. They had the aha
moment of what if we rearchitected
this stuff not to run on CPUs but to run
on a whole different class of computer
chips that were by their very nature
highly highly highly parallelizable
video game graphics cards made by the
leading company in the space at the time
Nvidia.
not obvious at the time and especially
not obvious that this highly advanced
cutting edge academic computer science
research
>> that was being done on supercomputers
usually
with incredible CPUs would use these toy
video game cards
>> that retail for $1,000.
>> Yeah. Less at that point in time. A
couple hundred bucks. So the team in
Toronto, they go out to like the local
Best Buy or something. They buy two
Nvidia GeForce GTX 580s, which were
Nvidia's top-of-the-line gaming cards at
the time. The Toronto team rewrites
their neural network algorithms in CUDA,
Nvidia's programming language. They
train it on these two off-the-shelf GTX
580s and this is how they achieve their
deep neural network and do 40% better
than any other entry in the imageet
competition. So when Jetson says that
this was the big bang moment of
artificial intelligence, a he's right.
This shows everybody that holy crap, if
you can do this with two off-the-shelf
GTX 580s, imagine what you could do with
more of them or with specialized chips.
And B, this event is what sets Nvidia on
the path from a somewhat struggling PC
gaming accessory maker to the leader of
the AI wave and the most valuable
company in the world today. And this is
how AI research tends to work is there's
some breakthrough that gets you this big
step change function and then there's
actually a multi-year process of
optimizing from there where you get
these kind of diminishing returns curves
on breakthroughs where the first half of
the advancement happens all at once and
then the second half takes many years
after that to figure out. It's rare and
amazing and it must be so cool when you
have an idea, you do it, and then you
realize, "Oh my god, I just found the
next giant leap in the field."
>> It's like I unlocked the next level to
use the video game analogy.
>> Yes,
>> I leveled up. So after Alexet, the whole
computer science world is a buzz.
>> People are starting to stop doubting
neural networks at this point.
>> Yes. So after Alexnap, the three of them
from Toronto, Jeff Hinton, Alex
Kashevky, and Ilaskever do the natural
thing, they start a company called DNN
Research, deep neural network research.
This company does not have any products.
This company has AI researchers
>> who just won a big competition.
>> And predictably, as you might imagine,
it gets acquired by Google almost
immediately.
>> Oh, are you intentionally shortening
this?
>> That's what I thought the story was. Oh,
it is not immediately.
>> Oh, okay.
>> There's a whole crazy thing that happens
where the first bid is actually from BU.
Oh,
>> I did not know that.
>> So, BU offers $12 million.
Jeff Henton doesn't really know how to
value the company and doesn't know if
that's fair. And so, he does what any
academic would do to best determine the
market value of the company. He says,
"Thank you so much. I'm gonna run an
auction now and I'm going to run it in a
highly structured manner where every
time anybody wants to bid the clock
resets and there's another hour where
anybody else can submit another bid.
>> No way.
>> So,
>> I didn't know this. This is crazy.
>> He gets in touch with everyone that he
knows from the research community who is
now working at a big company who he
thinks, hey, this would be a good place
for us to do our research. That includes
BYU, that includes Google, that includes
Microsoft, and there's one other
>> Facebook. Of course,
>> it's a two-year-old startup.
>> Oh, wait. So, it does not include
Facebook.
>> It does not include Facebook. Think
about the year. This is 2012.
So, Facebook's not really in the AI game
yet. They're still trying to build their
own AI lab.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Because Yan Lun and Fairwood
start in 2013. Is it Instagram?
>> Nope. It is the most important part of
the end of this episode.
>> Wait. Well, it can't be Tesla because
Tesla is older than that.
>> Nope.
>> Well, OpenAI wouldn't get founded for
years.
>> Wow. Okay, you really got me here.
>> What company slightly predated OpenAI
doing effectively the same mission?
>> Oh,
of course. Of course. Hiding in plain
sight.
Deep Mind. Wow. Deep Mind, baby. They
are the fourth bidder in a four-way
auction for DNN Research. Now, of
course, right after the bidding starts,
DeepMind has to drop out. They're a
startup. They don't actually have the
cash to be able to buy.
>> Yeah. Didn't even cross my mind cuz my
first question was like, where the hell
would they get the money because they
had no money.
>> But Jeff Hinton already knows and
respects Demis.
>> Ah,
>> even though he's just doing this at the
time startup called DeepMind.
>> That's amazing. Wait, how is Deep Mind
in the auction, but Facebook is not?
Isn't that wild?
>> That's wild.
>> So, the timing of this is concurrent
with the it was then called NIPS, now
it's called Nurips Conference. So, Jeff
Hinton actually runs the auction from
his hotel room at the Hera's Casino in
Lake Tahoe.
>> Oh my god, amazing.
>> So, the bids all come in and we got to
thank Cade Mets, the author of Genius
Makers, great book on the whole history
of AI that we're actually going to
reference a lot in this episode. The
bidding goes up and up and up. At some
point, Microsoft drops out. They come
back in. Told you DeepMind drops out.
So, it's BU and Google really going at
the end. And finally, at some point, the
researchers look at each other and they
say, "Where do we actually want to land?
We want to land at Google." And so, they
stop the bidding at $44 million and just
say, "Google, this is more than enough
money. We're going with you."
>> Wow. I knew it was about $40 million. I
did not know that whole story. It's
almost like Google itself and you know
the Dutch auction IPO process, right?
How fitting.
>> That's kind of a perfect DNA. Yes.
>> Wow.
>> And the three of them were supposed to
split it 33 each and Alex and Ilia go to
Jeff and say, "I really think you should
have a bigger percent. I think you
should have 40% and we should each have
30." And that's how it ends up breaking
down.
>> Ah, wow. What a team. Well, that leads
to the three of them joining Google
Brain directly. And turbocharging
everything going on there. Spoiler
alert, a couple years later, Astro
Teller, who would take over running
Google X after Sebastian Threaten left,
he would get quoted in the New York
Times in a profile of Google X, that the
gains to Google's core businesses and
search and ads and YouTube from Google
Brain have way more than funded all of
the other bets that they have made
within Google X and throughout the
company over the years. It's one of
these things that if you make something
a few% better that happens to do tens of
billions of dollars or hundreds of
billions of dollars in revenue, you find
quite a bit of loose change in those
couch cushions.
>> Yes, quite quite a bit of loose change.
But that's not where the AI history ends
within Google. There is another very
important piece of the Google AI story
that is an acquisition from outside of
Google. The AI equivalent of Google's
acquisition of YouTube. It's what we
talked about a minute ago, Deep Mind.
But before we tell the Deep Mind story,
now is a great time to thank a new
partner of ours, Sentry.
>> Yes, listeners, that is S N T R Y, like
someone's standing guard.
>> Yes, Sentry helps developers debug
everything from errors to latency and
performance issues, pretty much any
software problem, and fix them before
users get mad. As their homepage puts
it, they are considered quote unquote
not bad by over four million software
developers.
>> And today we're talking about the way
that Sentry works with another company
in the acquired universe, Anthropic.
Anthropic used to have some older
monitoring systems in place, but as they
scaled and became more complex, they
adopted Sentry to find and fix issues
faster.
>> So when you're building AI models, like
we're talking about all episode here,
small issues can ripple out into big
ones fast. Let's say you're running a
huge compute job like training a model.
If one node fails, it can have massive
downstream impacts, costing huge amounts
of time and money. Sentry helped
Anthropic detect bad hardware early so
they could reject it before causing a
cascading problem and taking debugging
down to hours instead of days for them.
And one other fun update from Sentry,
they now have an AI debugging agent
called Seir. Seir uses all the context
that Sentry has about your app usage to
run root cause analysis as issues are
detected. It uses errors, span data,
logs, and tracing and your code to
understand the root cause, fix it, and
get you back to shipping. It even
creates pull requests to merge code
fixes in. And on top of that, they also
recently launched agent and MCP server
monitoring. AI tooling tends to offer um
limited visibility into what's going on
under the hood, shall we say. Century's
new tools make it easy to understand
exactly what's going on. This is
everything from actual AI tool calls to
performance across different models and
interactions between AI and the
downstream services. We're pumped to be
working with Sentry. We're big fans of
the company and of all the great folks
we're working with there. They have an
incredible customer list including not
only Anthropic, but Cursor, Verscell,
Linear, and more. And actually, if
you're in San Francisco or the Bay Area,
Sentry is hosting a small invite only
event with Dave and I in San Francisco
for product builders on October 23rd.
You can register your interest at
century.io/acquired.
That's century sy.io/acquired.
And just tell them that Ben and David
sent you. All right, David. Deep mind. I
kind of like your framing. The YouTube
of AI.
>> The YouTube of AI for Google. They
bought this thing for, we'll talk about
the purchase price, but it's worth what
$500 billion today. I mean, this is as
good as Instagram or YouTube in terms of
greatest acquisitions of all time.
>> 100%. So, I remember when this deal
happened, just like I remember when the
Instagram deal happened cuz the number
was big at the time.
>> It was big, but I remember it for a
different reason. It was like when
Facebook bought Instagram, like, "Oh my
god, this is wow, what a tectonic shift
in the landscape of tech." In January
2014, I remember reading on TechCrunch
this random news,
>> right? You're like, "Deep what?"
>> That Google is spending a lot of money
to buy something in London that I've
never heard of that's working on
artificial intelligence.
>> Right. This really illustrates how
outside of mainstream tech AI was at the
time.
>> Yeah. And then you dig in a little
further and you're like, this company
doesn't seem to have any products. And
it also doesn't even really say anything
on its website about what Deep Mind is.
It says it is a quote unquote
cuttingedge artificial intelligence
company.
>> Wait, did you look this up on the way
back machine?
>> Yeah, I did. I did.
>> Oh, nice. to build generalpurpose
learning algorithms for simulations,
e-commerce, and games. This is 2014.
This does not compute, does not
register.
>> Simulations, e-commerce, and games. It's
kind of a random spattering of
>> Exactly. It turns out though, not only
was that description of what DeepMind
was fairly accurate, this company and
this purchase of it by Google was the
butterfly flapping its wings equivalent
moment that directly leads to OpenAI,
Chat, GPT, Anthropic, and basically
everything.
>> Certainly Gemini
>> that we know. Yeah, Gemini directly in
the world of AI today
>> and probably XAI given Elon's
involvement.
>> Yeah, of course XAI.
>> In a weird way, it sort of leads to
Tesla self-driving too. Carpathy.
>> Yeah, definitely. Okay, so what is the
story here? Deep Mind was founded in
2010 by a neuroscience PhD named Demis
Hassabis who previously started a video
game company.
>> Oh yeah. and a posttock named Shane Le
at University College London and a third
co-founder who was one of Demis' friends
from growing up, Mustafa Sullean. This
was unlikely to say the least.
>> This would go on to produce a knight and
Nobel Prize winner.
>> Yes. So Demis, the CEO, was a childhood
chess prodigy turned video game
developer who when he was aged 17 in
1994,
he had gotten accepted to the University
of Cambridge, but he was too young and
the university told him, "Hey, take a,
you know, gap year, come back." He
decided that he was going to go work at
a video game developer at a video game
studio called Bullfrog Productions for
the year. And while he's there, he
created the game Theme Park, if you
remember that. It was like a theme park
version of Sim City. This was a big
game. This was very commercially
successful. Roller Coaster Tycoon would
be sort of a clone of this that would
have many, many sequels over the years.
>> Oh, I played a ton of that. Yeah, it
sells 15 million copies in the mid 90s.
Wow, wild. Then after this, he goes to
Cambridge, studies computer science
there. After Cambridge, he gets back
into gaming, founds another game studio
called Elixir that would ultimately
fail. And then he decides, you know
what, I'm going to go get my PhD in
neuroscience. And that is how Demis ends
up at University College London. There
he meets Shane leg who's there as a
postoc. Shane is a self-described at the
time member of the lunatic fringe in the
AI community in that he believes
this is 2008 9 10 he believes that AI is
going to get more and more and more
powerful every year and that it will
become so powerful that it will become
more intelligent than humans and Shane
is one of the people who actually
popularizes the term artificial general
intelligence, AGI.
>> Oh, interesting. Which of course lots of
people talk about now and approximately
zero people were afraid of that. I mean,
you had like the Nick Bostonramm type
folks, but very few people were thinking
about super intelligence or the
singularity or anything like that. For
what it's worth, not Elon Musk. He's not
included in that list because Demis
would be the one who tells Elon about
this.
Yes, we'll get to it. So, Demis and
Shane hit it off. They pull in Mustafa,
Demis' childhood friend, who is himself
extremely intelligent. He had gone to
the University of Oxford and then
dropped out, I think, at age 19 to do
other startupy type stuff. So, the three
of them decided to start a company,
DeepMind. The name of course being a
reference to deep learning, Jeff
Hinton's work and everything coming out
of the University of Toronto. and the
goal that the three of these guys have
of actually creating an intelligent mind
with deep learning. Like Jeff and Ellie
and Alex aren't really thinking about
this yet. As we said, this is lunatic
fringe type stuff.
>> Yes, AlexNet, the cat paper, that whole
world is about better classifying data.
Can we better sort into patterns? It's a
giant leap from there to say, "Oh, we're
going to create intelligence."
>> Yes. I think probably some people
almost almost certainly at Google were
thinking, "Oh, we can create narrow
intelligence that'll be better than
humans at certain tasks."
>> I mean, a calculator is better than
humans at certain tasks,
>> right? But I don't think too many people
were thinking, "Oh, this is going to be
general intelligence, smarter than
humans,
>> right?"
>> So, they decide on the tagline for the
company is going to be solve
intelligence and use it to solve
everything else.
>> Ooh, I like it. I like it. Yeah. Yeah. I
mean, they're they're they're good
marketers, too, these guys.
>> So, there's just one problem to do what
they want to do.
>> Money. Just saying. Money is the
problem.
>> Right. Right. Right. Money is the
problem for lots of reasons. But even
more so than any other given startup in
the 2010 era, it's not like they can
just go spin up an AWS instance and like
build an app and deploy it to the app
store. They want to build really,
really, really, really, really big deep
learning neural networks that requires
Googleiz levels of compute. Well, it's
interesting. It actually they don't
require that much funding yet. The AI of
the time was go grab a few GPUs. We're
not training giant LLMs. That's the
ambition eventually, but right now, what
they just need to do is raise a few
million bucks. But who's going to give
you a few million bucks when there's no
business plan? When you're just trying
to solve intelligence, you need to find
some lunatics.
>> It's a tough cell to VCs,
>> except for the exact right,
>> as you say, they need to find some
lunatics.
>> Oh, I chose my words carefully, didn't
you?
>> Yeah, we use the term lunatic in uh
>> it's endearing is
>> most endearing possible way here given
that they were all basically right. So,
in June 2010, Demis and Shane managed to
get invited to the Singularity Summit in
San Francisco, California,
>> cuz they're not raising money for this
in London.
>> Yeah, definitely not. I think they tried
for a couple months and learned that
that was not going to be a viable path.
>> Yes. This summit, the Singularity
Summit, organized by Ray Kerszswhile,
uh, future Google employee, I think,
chief futurist, noted futurist,
>> Elzar Yudkowski,
and
Peter Teal.
>> Yes. So, Demis and Shane are uh excited
about getting this invite. like this is
probably our one chance to get funded.
>> But we probably shouldn't just walk in
guns blazing and say, "Peter, can we
pitch you?"
>> Yeah. So, they finagle their way into
Demis getting to give a talk on stage at
the summit.
>> Always the hack.
>> They're like, "This is great. This is
going to be the hack. The talk is going
to be our pitch to Peter and Founders
Fund." Peter has just started Founders
Fund at this point. you know, obviously
member of the PayPal mafia, very
wealthy.
>> I think he had a big Roth IRA at this
point is the right way to frame it.
>> Big Roth IRA that he had invested in
Facebook, first investor in Facebook. He
is the perfect target. They architect
the presentation at the summit to be a
pitch directly to Peter essentially a
thinly veiled pitch. Shane has a quote
in Parm Olsen's great book Supremacy
that we used as a source for a lot of
this deep mind story. And Shane says,
"We needed someone crazy enough to fund
an AGI company. Somebody who had the
resources not to sweat a few million and
liked super ambitious stuff." They also
had to be massively contrarian because
every professor that he would go talk to
would certainly tell him absolutely do
not even think about funding this.
That ven diagram sure sounds a lot like
Peter Teal. So they show up at the
conference. Demis is going to give the
talk. Goes out on stage. He looks out
into the audience. Peter is not there.
Turns out Peter wasn't actually that
involved in the conference.
>> He's a busy guy. He's a co-founder or
co-organizer, but is a busy guy.
>> Yes. Guy's like, shoot. Oh, we missed
our chance.
What are we gonna do? And then fortune
turns in their favor. They find out that
Peter is hosting an afterparty that
night at his house in San Francisco.
They get into the party. Deis seeks out
Peter and he's Deis is very very very
smart as anybody who's ever listened to
him talk would immediately know. He's
like rather than just pitching Peter
headon. I'm going to come about this
obliquely. He starts talking to Peter
about chess because he knows as
everybody does that Peter Teal loves
chess. And Demis had been the second
highest ranked player in the world as a
teenager in the under 14 category.
>> Good strategy.
>> Great strategy. The man knows his chess
moves. So Peter's like, "hm, I like you.
You seem smart. What do you do?" And
Deis explains, he's got this AGI
startup. They were actually here. He
gave a talk on stage as part of the
conference. People are excited about
this. And Peter says, "Okay, all right.
Come back to Founders Fund tomorrow and
give me the pitch." So they do. They
make the pitch. It goes well. Founders
Fund leads Deep Minds seed round of
about $2 million. My how times have
changed for AI company seed rounds these
days.
>> Oh yes.
>> Imagine leading Deep Mind seed round
with less than $2 million check. And
through Peter and Founders Fund, they
get introduced,
>> hey Elon, you should meet this guy.
>> To another member of the PayPal mafia,
Elon Musk.
>> Yes.
So, it's teed up in a pretty low-key
way. Hey, Elon, you should meet this
guy. He's smart. He's thinking about
artificial intelligence. So, Elon says,
"Great. Come over to SpaceX. I'll give
you the tour of the place." So, Deus
comes over for lunch and a tour of the
factory. Of course, Deus thinks it's
very cool, but really, he's trying to
reorient the conversation over to
artificial intelligence. And I'll read
this great excerpt from an article in
the Guardian. Musk told Hassabis his
priority was getting to Mars as a backup
planet in case something went wrong
here. I don't think he'd thought much
about AI at this point. Hassabis pointed
out a flaw in his plan. I said, "What if
AI was the thing that went wrong here?
Then being on Mars wouldn't help you
because if we got there, then it would
obviously be easy for an AI to get there
through our communication systems or
whatever it was." He hadn't thought
about that. So he sat there for a minute
without saying anything, just sort of
thinking, hm, that's probably true.
Shortly after, Musk too became an
investor in DeepMind.
>> Yes.
>> Yes. Yes.
>> I think it's crazy that Demis is sort of
the one that woke Elon up to this idea
of we might not be safe from the AI on
Mars either.
>> Right. Right. I hadn't considered that.
So, uh, this is the first time the bit
flips for Elon of we really need to
figure out a safe, secure AI for the
good of the people. That sort of seed
being planted in his head.
>> Yep.
>> Which of course is what Deep Mind's
ambition is. We are here doing research
for the good of humanity like scientists
in a peer-reviewed way.
>> Yep. I think all that is true. Also
in the intervening months to year after
this meeting between Demis and Elon and
Elon investing in DeepMind, Elon also
starts to get really really excited and
convinced about the capabilities of AI
in the near term and specifically the
capabilities of AI for Tesla.
>> Yes. Like with everything else in Elon's
world, once the bit flips and he becomes
interested, he completely changes the
way he views the world. Completely sheds
all the old ways and actions that he was
taking. And it's all about what do I
most do to embrace this new worldview
that I have?
>> And other people have been working on
for a while already by this point. AI
driving cars.
>> Yep.
>> That sounds like it would be a pretty
good idea for Tesla. does.
>> So Elon
starts trying to recruit as many AI
researchers as he possibly can and
machine vision and machine learning
experts into Tesla. And then Alexet
happens and man, Alex Net's really,
really, really good at identifying and
classifying images and cat videos on
YouTube and the YouTube recommener feed.
Well, is that really that different from
a live feed of video from a car that's
being driven and understanding what's
going on there?
>> Can we process it in real time and look
at differences between frames?
>> Perhaps controlling the car not all that
different. So Elon's excitement
channeled initially through Deep Mind
and Demis about AI and AI for Tesla
starts ratcheting up big time.
>> Yep. Meanwhile, back in London, DeepMind
is getting to work. They're hiring
researchers. They're getting to work on
models. They're making some vague noises
about products to their investors. Maybe
we could do something in shopping. Maybe
something in gaming like the description
on the website at the time of
acquisition said. But mostly what they
really really want to do is just build
these models and work on intelligence.
And then one day in late 2013,
they get a call from Mark Zuckerberg. He
wants to buy the company. Mark has woken
up to everything that's going on at
Google after Alexet and what AI is doing
for social media feed recommendations at
YouTube, the possibility of what it can
do at Facebook and for Instagram. He's
gone out and recruited Yan Lun Jeff
Hinton's old postoc who's together with
Jeff one of the sort of godfathers of AI
and deep learning
>> and really popularized the idea of
convolutional neural networks the next
hot thing in the field of AI at this
point in time
>> and so with Yan they have created fair
Facebook AI research which is a Google
brain rival within Facebook and remember
who the first investor in Facebook was
who's still on the board
>> Peter and is also the lead investor in
DeepMind. Where do you think Mark
learned about DeepMind? Peter Teal,
>> was it? Do you know for sure that it was
from Peter?
>> No, I don't know for sure, but like how
else could Mark have learned about this
startup in London?
>> I've got a great story of how Larry
Paige found out about it.
>> Oh, okay. Well, we'll get to that in one
sec.
>> So, Mark calls and offers to buy the
company. And there are various rumors of
how much Mark offered, but according to
Parmmy Olsson in her book, Supremacy,
the reports are that it was up to $800
million. Company with no products and a
long way from AGI.
>> That squares with what Cade Mets has in
his book that the founders would have
made about twice as much money from
taking Facebook's offer versus taking
Google's offer.
>> Yep. So Demis of course takes this news
to the investor group which by the way
is kind of against everything the
company was founded on. The whole aim of
the company and what he's promised the
team is that DeepMind is going to stay
independent, do research, publish in the
scientific community. We're not going to
be sort of captured and told what to do
by the whims of a capitalist
institution.
>> Yep. So definitely some deal point
negotiating that has to happen with Mark
and Facebook if this offer is going to
come through.
>> But Mark is so desperate at this point.
He is open to these very large dealpoint
negotiations such as Yan Lun gets to
stay in New York. Yan Lun gets to stay
operating his lab at NYU. Yan Lun is a
professor. He's flexible on some things.
Turns out Mark is not flexible on
letting Demis keep control of Deep Mind
if he buys it. Demis sort of argued for
we need to stay separate and carved out
and we need this independent oversight
board with his ability to intervene if
the mission of Deep Mind is no longer
being followed. And Mark's like, "No,
you'll be a part of Facebook."
>> Yeah. And you'll make a lot of money.
So, as this negotiation is going on, of
course, the investors in Deep Mind get
wind of this. Elon
finds out about what's going on. He
immediately calls up Demis and says, "I
will buy the company right now with
Tesla stock."
This is late 2013, like early 2014.
Tesla's market cap is about $20 billion.
So Tesla stock from then to today is
about a 70x runup.
Deis and Shane and Mustafa are like,
"Wow." Okay, there's a lot going on
right now. But to your point, they have
the same issues with Elon and Tesla that
they had with Mark. Elon wants them to
come in and work on autonomous driving
for Tesla. They don't want to work on
autonomous driving,
>> right? Or at least exclusively.
>> At least exclusively. Yep. So then
Dennis gets a third call from Larry
Page.
>> Do you want my story of how Larry knows
about the company? I absolutely want
your story of how Larry knows about the
company.
>> All right, so this is still early in
Deep Mind's life. We haven't progressed
all the way to this acquisition point
yet. Apparently, Elon Musk is on a
private jet with Luke Nosk, who's
another member of the PayPal mafia and
an angel investor in DeepMind, and
they're reading an email from Demis with
an update about a breakthrough that they
had where DeepMind AI figured out a
clever way to win at the Atari game
breakout.
>> Yes. And the strategy it figured out
with no human training was that you
could bounce the ball up around the
edges of the bricks and then without
needing to intervene, it could bounce
around along the top and win the game
faster without you needing to have a
whole bunch of interactions with the
paddle down at the bottom. They're
watching this video of how clever it is.
And flying with them on the same private
plane is Larry Page. Of course, because
Elon and Larry used to be very good
friends.
>> Yes. And Larry is like, "Wait, what are
you watching? What company is this?" And
that's how he finds out.
>> Wow.
>> Yes.
>> Elon must have been so angry about all
this.
>> And the crazy thing is this kinship
between Larry and Demis is I think the
reason why the deal gets done at Google.
Once the two of them get together, they
are like peas in a pod. Larry has always
viewed Google as an AI company.
>> Yeah.
>> Demis of course views DeepMind so much
as an AI company that he doesn't even
want to make any products until they can
get to AGI.
>> And Demis, in fact, we should share with
listeners. Demus told us this when we
were talking to him to prep for this
episode, just felt like Larry got it.
Larry was completely on board with the
mission of everything that DeepMind was
doing. And there's something else very
convenient about Google. They already
have Brain. So Larry doesn't need Demis
and Shane and Mustafa and DeepMind to
come work on products within Google.
>> Right?
>> Brain is already working on products
within Google. Demis can really believe
Larry when Larry says, "Nah, stay in
London. Keep working on intelligence. Do
what you're doing. I don't need you to
come work on products within Google."
brain is like actively going and
engaging with the product groups trying
to figure out, hey, how can we deploy
neural nets into your product to make it
better? That's like their reason for
being. So, they're happy to agree to
this
>> and it's working. Brain and neural nets
are getting integrated into search, into
ads, into Gmail, into everything. It is
the perfect home for Deep Mind. Home
away from home, shall we say?
>> Yes. And and there's a third reason why
Google's the perfect fit for Deep Mind.
infrastructure. Google has all the
compute infrastructure you could ever
want right there on tap.
>> Yes. At least with CPUs so far.
>> Yes.
>> So, how's the deal actually happen?
Well, after buying DNN research, Alan
Eustace, who David you spoke with,
right?
>> Yep.
>> Was Google's head of engineering at the
time, he makes up his mind that he
wanted to hire all the best deep
learning research talent that he
possibly could and he had a clear path
to do so. A few months earlier, Larry
Pageige held a strategy meeting on an
island in the South Pacific in Cade
Mets's book, It's an Undisclosed Island.
>> Of course, he did.
>> Larry thought that deep learning was
going to completely change the whole
industry. And so, he tells his team,
this is a quote, "Let's really go big."
Which effectively gave Allen a blank
check to go secure all the best
researchers that he possibly could. So,
in 2013, he decides, I'm going to get on
a plane in December before the holidays
and go meet DeepMind. Crazy story about
this. Jeff Hinton, who's at Google at
the time, had a thing with his back
where he couldn't sit down. He either
has to stand or lay. And so a long
flight across the ocean is not doable.
But he needs to be there as a part of
the diligence process. You have Jeff
Hinton. You need to use him to figure
out if you're going to buy a deep
learning company. And so Alan Eustace
decides he's going to charter a private
jet. And he's going to build this crazy
custom harness rig so that
Jeff Hinton won't be sliding around when
he's laying on the floor during takeoff
and landing.
>> Wow. I was thinking the first part of
this I'm pretty sure Google has planes.
They could just get into Google Play.
>> For whatever reason, this was a separate
charter.
>> But it's not solvable just with a
private plane. You need also a harness,
>> right? And Allan is the guy who set the
record for jumping out of the world's
highest Was it a balloon? I actually
don't know. The highest freef fall jump
that anyone has ever done, even higher
than that Red Bull stunt a few years
before. So, he's like very used to
designing these custom rigs for
airplanes. He's like, "Oh, no problem.
You just need a bed and some straps. I
jumped out of the atmosphere in a scuba
suit. I think we'll be fine."
>> That is amazing.
>> So, they fly to London. They do the
diligence. They make the deal. Deis has
true kinship with Larry and it's done.
$550 million US. There's an independent
oversight board that is set up to make
sure that the mission and goals of
DeepMind are actually being followed and
this is an asset that Google owns today
that again I think is worth half a
trillion dollars if it's independent.
>> Do you know what other member of the
PayPal mafia gets put on the ethics
board after the acquisition?
>> Reed Hoffman.
>> Reed Hoffman
>> has to be given the open AI tie later.
We are gonna come back to Reed in just a
little bit here.
>> Yes. So after the acquisition, it goes
very well very quickly. Famously the
data center cooling thing happens where
DeepMind carved off some part of the
team to go and be an emissary to Google
and look for ways to use DeepMind. And
one of them is around data center
cooling. Very quickly, July of 2016,
Google announces a 40% reduction in the
energy required to cool data centers. I
mean, Google's got a lot of data
centers, a 40% energy reduction. I
actually talked with Jim Gao, who's a
friend of the show and actually led a
big part of this project. And I mean, it
was just the most obvious application of
neural networks inside of Google right
away. Pays for itself.
>> Yeah. Imagine that paid for the
acquisition pretty quickly there.
>> Yes. David, should we talk about AlphaGo
on this episode?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> I watched the whole documentary that
Google produced about it. It's awesome.
This is actually something that you
would enjoy watching. Even if you're not
researching a podcast episode and you're
just looking to pull something up and
spend an hour or two, I highly recommend
it. It's on YouTube. It's the story of
how Deep Mind postacquisition from
Google trained a model to beat the world
Go champion at Go. And I mean, everyone
in the whole Go community coming in
thought there's no chance. This guy Lee
Seedall is so good that there's no way
that an AI could possibly beat him. It's
a fivegame thing. It just won the first
three games straight. I mean, completely
cleaned up and with inventive new
creative moves that no human has played
before. That's sort of the big crazy
takeaway.
>> There's a moment in one of the games,
right, where it makes a move of people
like, is that a mistake? Like that must
have just been an error. Yeah. Move 37.
Yeah. Yeah. And then a 100 moves later
it plays out and
>> that it was like completely genius. And
humans are now learning from Deep Mind's
strategy of playing the game and
discovering new strategies. A fun thing
for acquired listeners who are like, why
is it go? Go is so complicated compared
to chess. Chess has 20 moves that you
can make at the beginning of the game in
any given turn and then midame there's
like 30 to 40 moves that you could make.
Go on any given turn has about 200. And
so if you think cominatorilally, the
number of possible configurations of the
board is more than the number of atoms
in the universe.
>> That's a great Demis quote by the way.
>> Yeah.
>> And so he says, even if you took all the
computers in the world and ran them for
a million years as of 2017, that
wouldn't be enough compute power to
calculate all the possible variations.
So it's cool because it's a problem that
you can't brute force. You have to do
something like neural networks. And
there is this white space to be creative
and explore. And so it served as this
amazing breeding ground for watching a
neural network be creative against a
human.
>> Yeah. And of course it's totally in with
Demis' background and the DNA of the
company of playing games. You know Deus
was chess champion. And then after go
then they play Starcraft, right?
>> Oh really? I actually didn't know that.
>> Yeah. That was the next game that they
tackle was Starcraft, a real-time
strategy game against an opponent. And
that'll um come back up in a sec with
another opponent here in OpenAI.
>> Yes, David. But before we talk about the
creation of the other opponent, should
we thank another one of our friends here
at Acquired?
>> Yes, we should.
>> All right, listeners, we are here today
to tell you about a new friend of the
show we are very excited about. Work OS.
>> Yes. If you're building software that is
used in enterprises, you've probably
felt the pain of integrating things like
SSO, SCIM or SKIM, permissions, audit
logs, and all the other features that
are required by big customers. And if
you haven't felt this pain yet, just
wait until you get your first big
enterprise customer. And trust us, you
will.
>> Yes, Work OS turns these potential deal
blockers into simple drop-in APIs. And
while work OS had great product market
fit a few years ago with developers who
just want to save on some headache, they
really have become essential in the AI
era.
>> Yeah, I was shocked when they sent over
their latest customer list. Almost all
the big AI companies use work OS today
as the way that they've been able to
rapidly scale revenue so fast. Companies
like OpenAI, Anthropic, Cursor,
Perplexity, Sierra, Replet, Verscell,
hundreds of other AI startups all rely
on work OS as their O solution. So I
called the founder to ask why, and he
said it's basically two things. One, in
the AI era, these companies scale so
much faster that they need things like
authorization, authentication, and SSO
quickly to become enterprise ready and
keep up with customer demand even early
in life. Unlike older SAS companies of
yestery year, and two, unlike that world
where you could bring your own little
SAS product just for you and your little
team, these AI products reach deep into
your company's systems and data to
become the most effective. So, IT
departments are scrutinizing heavier
than ever to make sure that new products
are compliant before they can adopt
them.
>> Yeah, it's this kind of like second
order effect of the AI era that the days
of, oh, just swipe a credit card, bring
your own SAS solution for your product
team. You actually need to be enterprise
ready a lot sooner than you did before.
>> Yeah, it's not just about picking up
that big potential customer for the
revenue itself either. It's about doing
it so your competitors don't. Enterprise
readiness has become so table stakes for
companies no matter their stage. And
work OS is basically the weapon of
choice for the best software companies
to shortcut this process and get back to
focusing on what makes their beer taste
better, building the product itself.
>> Amen. Amen. So if you're ready to get
started with just a few lines of code
for SAML, SKIM, Arbok, SSO,
authorization, authentication, and
everything else to please IT admins and
their checklists, check out work OS.
It's the modern software platform to
make all this happen. That's works.com
and just tell them that Ben and David
sent you.
>> All right, David. So what are the second
order effects of Google buying DMIN?
Well, there's one person who is really,
really, really upset about this and
maybe two people if you include Mark
Zuckerberg, but Mark tends to play his
cards a little closer to the vest. Of
course, Elon Musk is very upset about
this acquisition. When Google buys
DeepMind out from under him, Elon goes
ballistic. As we said, Elon and Larry
had always been very close. And now
here's Google who Elon has already
started to sour on a little bit as he's
now trying to hire AI researchers. And
you've got Alan Eustace flying around
the world sucking up all of the AI
researchers into Google
and Elon's invested in DeepMind wanted
to bring Deep Mind into his own AI team
at Tesla and gone out from under him.
So, this leads to one of the most
fateful dinners in Silicon Valley's
history, organized in the summer of 2015
at the Rosewood Hotel on Sand Hill Road.
Of course, where else would you do a
dinner in Silicon Valley, but the
Rosewood, by two of the most leading
figures in the valley at the time, Elon
Musk and Sam Alman. Sam of course being
president of Y Combinator at the time.
So what is the purpose of this dinner?
They are there to make a pitch to all of
the AI researchers that Google and to a
certain extent Facebook have sucked up
and basically created this duopoly
status on.
>> Again, Google's business model and
Facebook's business model. feed
recommenders or these classifiers turn
out to be unbelievably valuable. So they
can, it's funny in hindsight saying
this, pay tons of money to these people,
>> tons of money, like millions of dollars,
>> take them out of academia and put them
into their dirty capitalist research
labs inside the companies
>> selling advertising.
>> Yes.
>> How dirty could you be? And the question
and the pitch that Elon and Sam have for
these researchers gathered at this
dinner is what would it take to get you
out of Google for you to leave? And the
answer they go around the table from
almost everybody is nothing. You can't.
Why would we leave? We're getting paid
way more money than we ever imagined.
Many of us get to keep our academic
positions and affiliations
and we get to hang out here at Google
>> with each other
>> with each other.
>> Iron sharpens iron. These are some of
the best minds in the world getting to
do cutting edge research with enormous
amount of resources and hardware at
their disposal. It's amazing.
>> It's the best infrastructure in the
world. We've got Jeff Dean here. There
is nothing you could tell us that would
cause us to leave Google.
Except there's one person who is
intrigued. And to quote from an amazing
Wired article at the time by Cade Mets,
who would later write Genius Makers,
right?
>> Yep. Exactly. Quote is the trouble was
so many of the people most qualified to
solve these problems were already
working for Google. And no one at the
dinner was quite sure that these
thinkers could be lured into a new
startup even if Musk and Maltman were
behind it. But one key player was at
least open to the idea of jumping ship.
And then there's a quote from that key
player. I felt like there were risks
involved, but I also felt like it would
be a very interesting thing to try.
>> It's the most Ilia quote of all time.
the most Ilia quote of all time because
that person was Ilia Sutskkever of
course of AlexNet and DNN research and
Google and about to become founding
chief scientist of Open AI. So the pitch
that Elon and Sam are making to these
researchers is let's start a new
nonprofit AI research lab where we can
do all this work out in the open. You
can publish free of the forces of
Facebook and Google and independent of
their control.
>> Yes, you don't have to work on products.
You can only work on research. You can
publish your work. It will be open. It
will be for the good of humanity. All of
these incredible advances, this
intelligence that we believe is to come
will be for the good of everyone, not
just for Google and Facebook.
>> And for one of the researchers, it
seemed too good to be true. So, they
basically weren't doing it cuz they
didn't think anyone else would do it.
It's sort of an activation energy
problem where once Ilia said, "Okay, I'm
in." And once he said, "I'm in, by the
way," Google came back with a big
counter, something like double the
offer. And I think it was delivered from
Jeff Dean personally, and Ilia said,
"Nope, I'm doing this." That was massive
for getting the rest of the top
researchers to go with him.
>> And it was nowhere near all of the top
researchers who left Google to do this,
but it was enough. It was a group of
seven or so researchers who left Google
and joined Elon and Sam and Greg
Brockman from Stripe who came over to
create open AI because that was the
pitch. We're all going to do this in the
open.
>> And that's totally what it was.
>> It totally is what it was. And the
stated mission of OpenAI was to quote
advance digital intelligence in the way
that is most likely to benefit humanity
as a whole unconstrained by a need to
generate financial return which is fine
as long as the thing that you need to
fulfill your mission doesn't take tens
of billions of dollars.
>> Yes.
>> So here's how they would fund it.
Originally there was a billion dollars
pledged.
>> Yes.
>> And that came from famously Elon Musk,
Sam Alman, Reed Hoffman, Jessica
Livingston, who I think most people
don't realize was part of that initial
trunch, and Peter Teal.
>> Yep.
>> Founders Fund of course would go on to
put massive amounts of money into OpenAI
itself later as well. The funny thing is
it was later reported that a billion
dollars was not actually collected. Only
about 130 million of it was actually
collected to fund this nonprofit. And
for the first few years that was plenty
for the type of research they were
doing, the type of compute they needed.
>> Most of that money was going to paying
salaries to the researchers. Not as much
as they could make at Google and
Facebook, but still million or$2 million
for these folks,
>> right? And Yeah. So that really worked
until it really didn't.
>> Yeah. So David, what were they doing in
the early days?
>> Well, in the first days, it was all
hands-on deck recruiting and hiring
researchers. And there was the initial
crew that came over and then pretty
quickly after that in early 2016, they
get a big big win when Dario Amade
leaves Google, comes over, joins Ilia
and crew at OpenAI
dream team, you know, assembling here.
And was he on Google Brain before this?
>> He was on Google Brain. Yep. And he
along with Ilia would run large parts of
OpenAI for the next couple years before
of course leaving to start Anthropic.
But we're still a couple years away from
Anthropic, Clawud, Chat GPT, Gemini,
everything today. for at least the first
year or two. Basically, the plan at
OpenAI is let's look at what's happening
at DeepMind and show the research
community that we can do as a new lab do
the same incredible things that they're
doing and maybe even do them better.
>> Is that why it looks so game like and
game focused?
>> Yes. Yes. So, they started building
models to play games. Famously, the big
one that they do is Dota 2, Defense of
the Ancients 2, the uh massively online
battle arena video game. They're like,
"All right, well, Deep Mind, you're
playing Starcraft. Well, we'll go play
Dota 2. That's even more complex, more
real time."
>> And similar to the emergent properties
of Go, the game would devise unique
strategies that you wouldn't see humans
trying. So, it clearly wasn't humans
coded their favorite strategies and
rules in, it was emergent.
>> Yeah,
>> they did other things. They had a
product called Universe which was around
training computers to play thousands of
games from Atari games to open world
games like Grand Theft Auto. They had
something where they were teaching a
model how to do a Rubik's cube. And so
it was a diverse set of projects that
didn't seem to coales around one of
these is going to be the big thing.
>> Yeah. It was research stuff. It was what
Deepmind was doing.
>> Yeah. It was like a university research.
It was like Deep Mind. And if you think
back to Elon being an investor in Deep
Mind, being really upset about Google
acquiring it out from under him makes
sense.
>> And I think Elon deserves a lot of
credit for having his name and his time
attached to OpenA at the beginning. A
lot of the big heavy hitter recruiting
was Elon throwing his weight behind
this. I'm willing to take a chance.
>> Absolutely.
>> Okay. So that's what's going on over at
OpenAI doing a lot of Deep Mind like
stuff. Bunch of projects, not one single
obvious big thing they're coalesing
around. It's not chat GBT time. Let's
put it that way. Let's go back to Google
cuz last we sort of checked in on them.
Yeah, they bought Deep Mind, but they
had their talent rated. And I don't want
you to get the wrong impression about
where Google is sitting just because
some people left to go to OpenAI. So
back in 2013 when Alex Kashesky arrives
at Google with Jeff Hinton and
Ilaskever,
he was shocked to discover that all
their existing machine learning models
were running on CPUs. People had asked
in the past for GPUs since machine
learning workloads were well suited to
run in parallel, but Google's
infrastructure team had pushed back and
said the added complexity and expanding
and diversifying the fleet. Let's keep
things simple. That doesn't seem
important for us.
>> We're a CPU shop here.
>> Yes. And so to quote from Genius Makers,
in his first days at the company, he
went out and bought a GPU machine, this
is Alex, from a local electronic store,
stuck it in the closet down the hall
from his desk, plugged it into the
network, and started training his neural
networks on this lone piece of hardware
just like he did in academia, except
this time Google's paying for the
electricity. Obviously, one GPU was not
sufficient, especially as more Googlers
wanted to start using it, too. And Jeff
Dean and Alan Eustace had also come to
the conclusion that disbelief while
amazing had to be rearchitected to run
on GPUs and not CPUs. So spring of 2014
rolls around. Jeff Dean and John Gandra
>> who we haven't talked about this
episode.
>> Yeah, JG.
>> Yes, you might be wondering, wait, isn't
that the Apple guy? Yes, he went on to
be Apple's head of AI who at this point
in time was at Google and oversaw Google
Brain 2014. They sit down to make a plan
for how to actually formally put GPUs
into the fleet of Google's data centers,
which is a big deal. It's a big change,
but they're seeing enough reactions to
neural networks that they know to do
this.
>> Yeah. After Alex, it's just a matter of
time.
>> Yeah. So, they settle on a plan to order
40,000 GPUs
from Nvidia.
>> Yeah, of course. Who else are you going
to order them from?
>> For a cost of $130 million.
That's a big enough price tag that the
request gets elevated to Larry Page who
personally approves it even though
finance wanted to kill it because he
goes look the future of Google is deep
learning. As an aside, let's look at
Nvidia at the time. This is a giant
giant order. Their total revenue was $4
billion. This is one order for 130
million.
>> I mean Nvidia is primarily consumer
graphics card company at this point.
>> Yes. and their market cap is $10
billion.
It's almost like Google gave Nvidia a
secret that hey, not only does this work
in research like the imageet
competition, but neural networks are
valuable enough to us as a business to
make a hundred plus million dollar
investment in right now, no questions
asked. We got to ask Jensen about this
at some point. This had to be a tell.
>> This had to really give Nvidia the
confidence. Oh, we should way forward
invest on this being a giant thing in
the future. So, all of Google wakes up
to this idea. They start really putting
it into their products. Google Photos
happened. Gmail starts offering typing
suggestions. David, as you pointed out
earlier, Google's giant Adwords business
started finding more ways to make more
money with deep learning. In particular,
when they integrated it, they could
start predicting what ads people would
click in the future. And so Google
started spending hundreds of millions
more on GPUs on top of that 130 million,
but very quickly paying it back from
their ad system. So it became more and
more of a no-brainer to just buy as many
GPUs as they possibly could. But once
neural nets started to work, anyone
using them, especially at Google scale,
kind of had this problem. Well, now we
need to do giant amounts of matrix
multiplications anytime anybody wants to
use one. The matrix multiplications are
effectively how you do that propagation
through the layers of the neural
network. So you sort of have this
problem.
>> Yes, totally. There's the inefficiency
of it, but then there's also the
business problem of wait a minute, it
looks like we're just going to be
shipping hundreds of millions, soon to
be billions of dollars over to Nvidia
every year for the foreseeable future.
>> Right? So there's this amazing moment
right after Google rolls out speech
recognition, their latest use case for
neural nets just on Nexus phones because
again they don't have the infrastructure
to support it on all Android phones. it
becomes a super popular feature and Jeff
Dean does the math and figures out if
people use this for I don't know call it
three minutes a day and we roll it out
to all billion Android phones we're
going to need twice the number of data
centers that we currently have across
all of Google just to handle it
>> just for this feature yeah
>> there's a great quote where Jeff goes to
Holtzel and goes we need another Google
or David, as you were hinting at, the
other option is we build a new type of
chip customized for just our particular
use case.
>> Yep. Matrix multiplication, tensor
multiplication, a tensor processing
unit, you might say.
>> Ah, yes. Wouldn't that be nice? So,
conveniently, Jonathan Ross, who's an
engineer at Google, has been spending
his 20% time at this point in history
working on an effort involving FPGAAS.
These are essentially expensive but
programmable chips that yield really
fantastic results. So they decide to
create a formal project to take that
work combine it with some other existing
work and build a custom ASIC or an
application specific integrated circuit.
So enter David as you said the tensor
processing unit made just for neural
networks that is far more efficient from
GPUs at the time with the trade-off that
you can't really use it for anything
else. It's not good for graphics
processing. It's not good for lots of
other GPU workloads, just matrix
multiplication and just neural networks,
but it would enable Google to scale
their data centers without having to
double their entire footprint. So the
big idea behind the TPU, if you're
trying to figure out like what was the
core insight, they use reduced
computational precision. So it would
take numbers like 4586.8272
and round it just to 4586.8
or maybe even just 4586 with nothing
after the decimal point. And this sounds
kind of counterintuitive at first. Why
would you want less precise rounded
numbers for this complicated math? The
answer is efficiency. If you can do the
heavy lifting in your software
architecture or what's called
quantization to account for it, you can
store information as less precise
numbers, then you can use the same
amount of power and the same amount of
memory and the same amount of
transistors on a chip to do far more
calculations per second. So you can
either spit out answers faster or use
bigger models. The whole thing is quite
clever behind the TPU. M
>> the other thing that has to happen with
the TPU is it needs to happen now cuz
it's very clear speech to text is a
thing. It's very clear some of these
other use cases at Google.
>> Yeah. Demand for all of this stuff
that's coming out of Google Brain is
through the roof immediately.
>> Right. And we're not even two LLMs yet.
It's just like everyone sort of expects
some of this whether it's computer
vision in photos or speech recognition
like it's just becoming a thing that we
expect and it's going to flip Google's
economics upside down if they don't have
it. So the TPU was designed, verified,
built, and deployed into data centers in
15 months.
>> Wow.
>> It was not like a research project that
could just happen over several years.
This was like a hair on fire problem
that they launched immediately. One very
clever thing that they did was a they
used the FPGAAS as a stop gap. So even
though they were like too expensive on a
unit basis, they could get them out as a
test fleet and just make sure all the
math worked before they actually had the
AS6 printed at I don't know if it was a
TSMC, but you know, fabbed and ready.
The other thing they did is they fit the
TPU into the form factor of a hard
drive, so it could actually slot into
the existing server racks. You just pop
out a hard drive and you pop in a TPU
without needing to do any physical
rearchitecture.
>> Wow, that's amazing. That's the most
googly infrastructure story
>> since the corkboards.
>> Exactly. Also, all of this didn't happen
in Mountain View. It was at a Google
satellite office in Madison, Wisconsin.
>> Whoa.
>> Yes.
>> Why Madison, Wisconsin?
>> There was a particular professor out of
the university and there was a lot of
students that they could recruit from
and
>> Wow.
>> Yeah. I mean, it was probably them or
Epic. Where are you going to go work?
>> Yeah.
>> Wow. They also then just kept this a
secret,
>> right? Why would you tell anybody about
this?
>> Because it's not like they're offering
these in Google Cloud, at least at
first, and why would you want to tell
the rest of the world what you're doing?
So, the whole thing was a complete
secret for at least a year before they
announced it at Google IO. So, really
crazy. The other thing to know about the
TPUs is they were done in time for the
AlphaGo match. So, that match ran on a
single machine with four TPUs in Google
Cloud. And once that worked, obviously
that gave Google a little bit of extra
confidence to go really, really rip
production. So that's the TPU. V1 by all
accounts was not great. They're on V7 or
V8 now. It's gotten much better. TPUs
and GPUs look a lot more similar than
they used to than they've sort of
adopted features from each other. But
today, Google, it's estimated, has 2 to
3 million TPUs. For reference, Nvidia
shipped, people don't know for sure,
somewhere around 4 million GPUs last
year. So people talk about AI chips like
it's this just oh one horse race with
Nvidia. Google has like an almost Nvidia
scale internal thing making their own
chips at this point for their own and
for Google Cloud customers. The TPU is a
giant deal in AI in a way that I think a
lot of people don't realize.
>> Yep. This is one of the great ironies
and maddening things to OpenAI and Elon
Musk is that OpenAI gets founded in 2015
with the goal of, hey, let's shake all
this talent out of Google and level the
playing field and Google just
accelerates,
>> right? They also build TensorFlow.
That's the framework that Google Brain
built to enable researchers to build and
train and deploy machine learning
models. And they built it in such a way
that it doesn't just have to run on
TPUs. super portable without any
rewrites to run on GPUs or even CPUs
too. So this would replace the old disc
belief system and kind of be their
internal and external framework for
enabling ML researchers going forward.
So somewhat paradoxically during these
years after the founding of Open AI,
yes, some amazing researchers are
getting siphoned off from Google and
Google Brain, but Google Brain is also
firing on all cylinders during this time
frame,
>> delivering on the business purposes for
Google left and right.
>> Yes. And pushing the state-of-the-art
forward in so many areas. And then in
2017, a paper gets published from eight
researchers on the Google brain team
kind of quietly. These eight folks were
obviously very excited about the paper
and what it described and the
implications of it and they thought it
would be very big. Google itself, uh,
cool, this is like the next iteration of
our language model work. Great.
>> Which is important to us. But are we
sure this is the next Google? No.
>> No. There are a whole bunch of other
things we're working on that seem more
likely to be the next Google. But this
paper and its publication would actually
be what gave OpenAI the opportunity
>> to build the next Google
>> to grab the ball and run with it and
build the next Google because this is
the transformer paper.
>> Okay. So where did the transformer come
from? like what was the latest thing
that language models had been doing at
Google? So coming out of the success of
Fran Ox's work on Google Translate and
the improvements that happened there
>> in like the late 2000sish 2007
>> yeah mid to late 2000s they keep
iterating on translate and then once
Jeff Hitten comes on board and AlexNet
happens they switch over to a neural
networkbased language model for
translate which was dramatically better
and like a big crazy cultural thing
because you've got these researchers
parachuting in again led by Jeff Dean
saying I'm pretty sure our neural
networks can do this way better than the
classic methods that we've been using
for the last 10 years. What if we take
the next several months and do a proof
of concept? They end up throwing away
the entire old codebase and just
completely wholesale switching to this
neural network. There's actually this
great New York Times magazine story that
ran in 2016 about it. And I remember
reading the whole thing with my jaw on
the floor. Like, wow. Neural networks
are a big effing deal. And this was the
year before the Transformer paper would
come out.
>> Before the Transformer paper. Yes. So,
they do the rewrite of Google Translate,
make it based on recurrent neural
networks, which were state-of-the-art at
that point in time. And it's a big
improvement. But as teams within Google
Brain and Google Translate keep working
on it, there's some limitations. And in
particular, a big problem was that they
quote unquote forgot things too quickly.
I don't know if it's exactly the right
analogy, but you might say in sort of
like today's transformer world speak,
you might say that their context window
was pretty short. As these language
models progressed through text, they
needed to sort of remember everything
they had read so that when they need to
change a word later or come up with the
next word, they could have a whole
memory of the body of text to do that.
>> So, one of the ways that Google tries to
improve this is to use something called
long short-term memory networks or LSTMs
as the acronym that people use for this.
And basically what LSTMs do is they
create a persistent or long
shortterm memory.
You got to use your brain a little bit
here for the model so that it can keep
context as it's going through a whole
bunch of steps.
>> And people were pretty excited about
LSTMs at first.
>> People are thinking like, oh, LSTMs are
what are going to take language models
and large language models mainstream,
>> right? And indeed in 2016 they
incorporated into Google Translate these
LSTMs. It reduces the error rate by 60%.
Huge jump. Yep.
>> The problem with LSTMs though, they were
effective but they were very
computationally intensive and they
didn't parallelize that great. All the
efforts that are coming out of Alex Net
and then the TPU project of
parallelization. This is the future.
this is how we're going to make AI
really work. LSTMs are a bit of a
roadblock here. Yes. So, a team within
Google Brain starts searching for a
better architecture that also has the
attractive properties of LSTMs that it
doesn't forget context too quickly, but
can parallelize and scale better
>> to take advantage of all these new
architectures.
>> Yes. And a researcher named Jakob
Oscarite had been toying around with the
idea of broadening the scope of quote
unquote attention in language
processing. What if rather than focusing
on the immediate words, instead what if
you told the model, hey, pay attention
to the entire corpus of text, not just
the next few words. Look at the whole
thing. And then based on that entire
context and giving your attention to the
entire context, give me a prediction of
what the next translated word should be.
Now, by the way, this is actually how
professional human translators translate
text. You don't just go word by word. I
actually took a translation class in
college, which was really fun. You read
the whole thing of the original in the
original language. you get and
understand the context of what the
original work is and then you go back
and you start to translate it with the
entire context of the passage in mind.
>> So it would take a lot of computing
power for the model to do this but it is
extremely parallelizable. So Yakob
starts collaborating with a few other
people on the brain team. They get
excited about this. They decide that
they're going to call this new technique
the transformer because one, that is
literally what it's doing. It's taking
in a whole chunk of information,
processing, understanding it, and then
transforming it. And B, they also love
transformers as kids. That's not not why
they named it the transformer.
>> And it's taking in the giant corpus of
text and storing it in a compressed
format. Right.
>> Yeah. I bring this up because that is
exactly how you pitched the micro
kitchen conversation with Nom Shazir in
2000 2001 17 years earlier who is a
co-author on this paper.
>> Yes. Well, so speaking of Nam Shazir, he
learns about this project and he
decides, hey, I've got some experience
with this. This sounds pretty cool.
LSTMs definitely have problems. This
could be promising. I'm going to jump in
and work on it with these guys.
And it's a good thing he did because
before Gnome joined the project, they
had a working implementation of the
transformer, but it wasn't actually
producing any better results than LSTMs.
Gnome joins the team, basically pulls a
Jeff Dean, rewrites the entire codebase
from scratch, and when he's done, the
transformer now crushes
the LSTMbased
Google Translate solution. And it turns
out that the bigger they make the model,
the better the results get. It seems to
scale really, really, really well.
Steven Levy wrote a piece in Wired about
the history of this. And there are all
sorts of quotes from the other members
of the team just littered all over this
piece with things like Gnome is a
magician. Gnome is a wizard. Gnome took
the idea and came back and said, "It
works now."
Yeah. And you wonder why Noom and Jeff
Dean are the ones together working on
the next version of Gemini now.
>> Yes. Noom and Jeff Dean are definitely
two peas in a pod here.
>> Yes. So we talked to Greg Curado from
Google Brain, one of the founders of
Google Brain, and it was a really
interesting conversation because he
underscored how elegant the transformer
was. And he said it was so elegant that
people's response was often, "This can't
work. It's too simple. Transformers are
barely a neural network architecture,
>> right? It was another big change from
the AlexNet Jeff Hinton lineage neural
networks.
>> Yeah, it actually has changed the way
that I look at the world cuz he pointed
out that in nature, this is Greg, the
way things usually work is the most
energyefficient way they could work.
almost from an evolution perspective
that the most simple, elegant solutions
are the ones that survive because they
are the most efficient with their
resources. And you can kind of port this
idea over to computer science, too, that
he said he's developed a pattern
recognition inside of the research lab
to realize that you're probably on to
the right solution when it's really
simple and really efficient versus a
complex idea.
>> Mhm.
>> It's very clever. It's I think it's very
true. You know how when you sit around
and you have a thorny problem and you
debate and you whiteboard and you come
up with all and then you're like, "Oh my
god, oh my god, it's so simple." And
that ends up being the right answer.
>> Yeah. There's an elegance to the
transformer.
>> Yes. And that other thing that you
touched on there, this is the beginning
of the modern AI, just feed it more
data. The famous piece, the bitter
lesson by Rich Sutton, wouldn't be
published until 2019. For anyone who
hasn't read it, it's basically we always
think as AI researchers, we're we're so
smart and our job is to come up with
another great algorithm, but effectively
in every field from language to computer
vision to chess, you just figure out a
scalable architecture and then the more
data wins. Just these infinitely
scaling,
>> more data, more compute, better results.
>> Yes. And this is really the start of
when that starts to be like oh we have
found the scalable architecture that
will go at so far for I don't know close
to a decade of just more data in more
energy more compute better results.
>> So the team and noom like yo this thing
has a lot a lot of potential.
>> This is more than better translate. We
can really apply this.
>> Yeah this is going to be more than
better Google translate. The rest of
Google though definitely slower to wake
up to the potential.
>> They build some stuff within a year.
They build BERT, the large language
model.
>> Yes, absolutely true. It is a false
narrative out there that Google did
nothing with the transformer after the
paper was published. They actually did a
lot.
>> In fact, BERT was one of the first LLMs.
>> Yes, they did a lot with
transformer-based large language models
after the paper came out. What they
didn't do was treat it as a wholesale
technology platform change,
>> right? They were doing things like BERT
and uh MUM, this other model, you know,
they could work it into search results
quality. And I think that did
meaningfully move the needle even though
Google wasn't bragging about it and
talking about it. They got better at
query comprehension. They were working
it into the core business just like
every other time Google Brain came up
with something great.
>> Yep. So, in perhaps one of the greatest
decisions ever for value to humanity and
maybe one of the worst corporate
decisions ever for Google, Google allows
this group of eight researchers to
publish the paper under the title
attention is all you need. Obviously, a
nod to the classic Beatles song about
love. As of today in 2025,
this paper has been cited over
173,000 times in other academic papers,
making it currently the seventh most
cited paper of the 21st century. And I
think all of the other papers above it
on the list have been out much longer.
Wow. And also of course within a couple
years all eight authors of the
transformer paper had left Google to
either start or join AI startups
including open AAI. Brutal. And of
course Noom starting Character AI which
what are we calling it? Aquisition. He
would end up back at Google via some
strange licensing and IP and hiring
agreement on the few billion dollars
order. very very expensive mistake on
Google's part. It
>> is fair to say that 2017 begins the
5-year period of Google not sufficiently
seizing the opportunity that they had
created
>> with the transformer. Yes. So speaking
of seizing opportunities, what is going
on at OpenAI during this time?
>> And does anyone think the transformer is
a big deal over there?
>> Yes. Yes, they did. But here's where
history gets really, really crazy. Right
after Google publishes the Transformer
paper in September of 2017,
Elon gets really, really fed up with
what's going on at OpenAI.
>> There's like seven different strategies,
are we doing video games? Are we doing
competitions? What's the plan?
>> What is happening here? As best as I can
tell, all you're doing is just trying to
copy Deep Mind. Meanwhile, I'm here
building SpaceX and Tesla. Self-driving
is becoming more and more clear as
critical to the future of Tesla. I need
AI researchers here, and I need great AI
advancements to come out to help what
we're doing at Tesla. Open AAI isn't
cutting it. So, he makes an ultimatum to
Sam and the rest of the OpenAI board. He
says, "I'm happy to take full control of
OpenAI and we can merge this into Tesla.
I don't even know how that would be
possible to merge a nonprofit into
Tesla."
>> But in Elon Land, if he takes over as
CEO of Open AI, it almost doesn't
matter. We're just treating it as if
it's the same company anyway, just like
we do with the deals with all of my
companies,
>> right? or he's out completely along with
all of his funding. And Sam and the rest
of the board are like, "No."
>> And as we know now, they're sort of
calling capital into the business. It's
not like they actually got all the cash
up front,
>> right? So they're only 130 millionish
into the billion dollars of commitment.
They don't reach a resolution and by
early 2018, Elon is out along with him
the main source of OpenAI's funding. So
either this is just a really really
really bad misjudgment by Elon
or the sort of panic that this throws
Open AI into is the catalyst that makes
them reach for the transformer and say,
"All right, we got to figure things out.
Necessity is the mutter of invention.
Let's go for it."
>> It's true. I don't know if during this
personal tension between Elon and Sam if
they had already decided to go all in on
Transformers or not because the thing
you very quickly get to if you decide
transformers language models were going
all in on that. You do quickly realize
you need a bunch of data, you need a
bunch of compute, you need a bunch of
energy, and you need a bunch of capital.
And so if your biggest backer is walking
away, the 3D chess move is, "Oh, we got
to keep him because we're about to pivot
the company and we need his capital for
this big pivot we're doing." The 4D
chess is if he walks away, maybe I can
turn it into a for-profit company and
then raise money into it and eventually
generate enough profits to fund this
extremely expensive new direction we're
going in. I don't know which of those it
was.
>> Yeah, I don't know either. I suspect the
truth is it's sum of both.
>> Yes. But either way, how nuts is it that
a these things happened at the same time
and b the company wasn't burning that
much cash and then they decided to go
allin on we need to do something so
expensive that we need to be a
for-profit company in order to actually
achieve this mission cuz it's just going
to require hundreds of billions of
dollars for the far foreseeable future.
>> Yep. So in June of 2018, OpenAI releases
a paper describing how they have taken
the transformer and developed a new
approach of pre-training them on very
large amounts of general text on the
internet and then fine-tuning that
general pre-training to specific use
cases. And they also announced that they
have trained and run the first proofof
concept model of this approach which
they are calling GPT1
generatively pre-trained transformer
version one
>> which we should say is right around the
same time as BERT and right around the
same time as another large language
model based on the transformer out of
here in Seattle the Allen Institute.
>> Yes indeed. So it's not as if this is
heretical and a secret. Other AI labs
including Google's own is doing it. But
from the very beginning, OpenAI seem to
be taking this more seriously given the
cost of it would require betting the
company if they continued down this
path.
>> Yeah. Or betting the nonprofit, betting
the entity.
>> Yes.
>> We're going to need some new terminology
here.
>> Yes.
>> So Elon's just walked out the door.
Where are they going to get the money
for this? Sam turns to one of the other
board members of OpenAI, Reed Hoffman.
Reed just a year or so earlier had sold
LinkedIn to Microsoft and Reed is now on
the board of Microsoft. So Reed says,
"Hey, why don't you come talk to Satia
about this?"
>> Do you know where he actually talks to
Satia?
>> Oh, I do. Oh, I do. In July of 2018,
they set a meeting for Sam Alman and
Satia Nadella to sit down while they're
both at the Allen and Company Sun Valley
Conference in Sun Valley, Idaho.
>> It's perfect.
>> And while they're there, they hash out a
deal for Microsoft to invest $1 billion
into OpenAI in a combination of both
cash and Azure cloud credits. And in
return, Microsoft will get access to
OpenAI's technology, get an exclusive
license to OpenAI's technology for use
in Microsoft's products. And the way
that they will do this is OpenAI the
nonprofit will create a captive
for-profit entity called OpenAI LP
controlled by the nonprofit OpenAI Inc.,
and Microsoft will invest into the
captive for-profit entity. Reed Hoffman
joins the board of this new structure
along with Sam, Ilia, Greg Brockman,
Adam D'Angelo, and Tasha Macaulay. And
thus, the modern OpenAI forprofit
nonprofit question mark is created.
>> The thing that's still being figured out
even today here in 2025 is created. This
is like the complete history of AI. This
is not just the Google AI episode.
>> Well, these things are totally
inextricable. And I was just going to
say this is the Google part three
episode. Microsoft, they're back.
Microsoft is Google's mortal enemy. Yes.
That in our first episode on the
founding of Google and search and then
in the second episode on Alphabet and
all the products that they made, the
whole strategy at Google was always
about Microsoft. They finally beat them
on every single front and here they are
>> showing up again saying, "What was
Sati's line? We just want to see them
dance." I think the line that would come
a couple years later is we want the
world to know that we made Google dance.
Oh man. But this is all still pre-Chat
GPT. This is just Sam lining up the
financing he needs for what appears to
be a very expensive scaling exercise
they're about to embark on with GPT2 and
onward.
>> Yep. And this is the right time to talk
about why from OpenAI's perspective
Microsoft is the absolute perfect
partner. It's not just that they have a
lot of money,
>> although that helps.
>> I mean, that helps. That helps a lot.
But more important than money, they have
a really, really great public cloud.
Azure.
>> Yes. OpenAI is not going to go buy a
bunch of NVIDIA GPUs and then build
their own data center here at this point
in 2018. That's not the scale of company
that they are. They need a cloud
provider in order to actually do all the
compute that they want to do. If they
were back at Google and these
researchers are doing it, great. Then
they have all the infrastructure. But
OpenAI needs to tie themselves to
someone with the infrastructure.
>> And there's basically only two non-
Googlele options. They're both in
Seattle.
And hey, one of them in Microsoft is
really interested, also has a lot of
cash. It seems like a great partnership.
>> That's true. I wonder if they did talk
to AWS at all about it cuz I think this
is a crazy Easter egg. I hesitate to say
it out loud, but I think AWS was
actually in the very first investment
with Elon in Open AI.
>> Oh wow. And I don't know if it was in
the form of credits or what the deal
was, but I'd seen it reported a couple
places that AWS actually was in that
nonprofit round.
>> Yeah, in the uh nonprofit funding, the
donations to
>> Yes.
>> the early OpenAI.
>> Anyway, Microsoft Open AI, they end up
tying up
>> a match made in heaven. Satya and Sam
are on stage together talking about how
this amazing partnership and marriage
has come together and they're off to
model training.
>> Yeah. And this paves the way for the GPT
era of OpenAI. But before we tell that
story,
>> yes, now is a great time to thank one of
our favorite companies, Shopify.
>> Yes. And this is really fun because we
have been friends and fans of Shopify
for years. We just had Toby on ACQ2 to
talk about everything going on in AI and
everything that has happened at Shopify
in the six years now since we covered
the company on acquired.
>> It's been a pretty insane transformation
for them.
>> Yeah. So, back at their IPO, Shopify was
the go-to platform for entrepreneurs and
small businesses to get online. What's
happened since is that is still true.
And Shopify has also become the world's
leading commerce platform for
enterprises of any size, period.
>> Yeah. So, what's so cool about the
company is how they've managed to scale
without losing their soul. Even though
companies like Everlane and Vori and
even older established companies like
Mattel are doing billions of revenue on
Shopify, the company's mission is still
the same as the day Toby founded it to
create a world where more entrepreneurs
exist.
>> Oh, yeah. Ben, you got to tell everyone
your favorite enterprise brand that is
on Shopify.
>> Oh, I'm saving that for next episode. I
have a whole thing planned for episode
two of this season.
>> Okay. Okay, great. Anyway, the reason
enterprises are now also using Shopify
is simple. Because businesses of all
sizes just sell more with Shopify. They
built this incredible ecosystem where
you can sell everywhere. Obviously, your
own site. That's always been true. But
now with Shopify, you can easily sell on
Instagram, YouTube, Tik Tok, Roblox,
Roku, ChatgPT, Perplexity, anywhere.
Plus, with Shop Pay, their accelerated
checkout, you get amazing conversion,
and it has a built-in user base of 200
million people who have their payment
information already stored with it.
Shopify is the ultimate example of not
doing what doesn't make your beer taste
better. Even if you're a huge brand,
you're not going to build a better
e-commerce platform for your product.
But that is what Toby and Shopify's
entire purpose is. So, you should use
them.
>> Yes. So, whether you're just getting
started or already at huge scale, head
on over to shopify.com/acquired.
That's hop fy.com/acquired.
And just tell them that Ben and David
sent you.
>> All right. So, what are we in GPT2? Is
that what's being trained right here?
>> Yes, GPT2. This was the first time I
heard about it. Data scientists around
Seattle were talking about this cool,
>> right? So, after the first Microsoft
partnership, the first billion dollar
investment in 2019, OpenAI releases
GPT2, which is still early but very
promising that can do a lot of things,
>> a lot of things, but it required an
enormous amount of creativity on your
part. You kind of had to be a developer
to use it. And if you were a consumer,
there was a very heavy load put on you.
You had to go write a few paragraphs and
then paste those few paragraphs into the
language model and then it would suggest
a way to finish what you were writing
based on the source paragraphs. But it
wasn't interactive.
>> Yes, it was not a chat interface.
>> Yes,
>> there was no interface essentially for
it.
>> It was an API, but it can do things like
obviously translate text. I mean,
Google's been doing that for a long
time, but GPT2, you could do stuff like
make up a fake news headline and give it
to GPT2 and it would write a whole
article. You would read it and you'd be
like, "Uh, sounds like it was written by
a bot."
>> Yeah.
>> But again, there was no front door to it
for normal people. You had to really be
willing to wait in the muck to use this
thing. So then the next year in June of
2020, GPT3
comes out. Still no front door, you
know, user interface to the model, but
it's very good. GPT2 showed the promise
of what was possible. GPT3,
it's starting to be in the conversation
of can this thing pass the Turing test.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> You have a hard time distinguishing
between articles that GPT wrote and
articles that humans wrote. It's very
good. And there starts to be a lot of
hype around this thing. And so even
though consumers aren't really using it,
the broader awareness is that there's
something interesting on the horizon. I
think the number of AI pitch decks that
VCs are seeing is starting to tick up
around this time as is the Nvidia stock
price.
>> Yes.
>> So then in the next year in the summer
of 2021,
Microsoft
releases
GitHub Copilot using GPT3. This is the
first not just Microsoft product that
comes out with GPT baked into it. But
first
>> productization
>> product anywhere. Yeah. First
productization of GPT.
>> Yes. Of any open AI technology.
>> Yeah. It's big. This starts a massive
change in how software gets written in
the world.
>> Slowly then all at once. It's one of
these things where at first just a few
software engineers and there was a lot
of whispers of how cool is this? It
makes me a little bit more efficient.
And now you get all these comments like
75% of all companies code is written
with AI.
>> Yep. So after that, Microsoft invests
another $2 billion in open AI, which
seemed like a lot of money at the time.
So that takes us to the end of 2021.
There's an interesting kind of context
shift that happens around here.
>> Yeah. The bottom falls out on tech
stocks, crypto, the broader markets
really, everyone suddenly goes from risk
on to risk off. And part of it was war
in Ukraine, but a lot of it was interest
rates going up. And Google gets hit
really hard. The high water mark was
November 19th of 2021. Google was right
at $2 trillion of market cap. About a
year after that slide began, they were
worth a trillion dollars. Nearly a 50%
draw down.
>> Wow. So towards the end of 2022 leading
up to the launch of Chat GPT,
>> people I think are starting to realize
Google's slow. They're slow to react to
things. It feels like they're a old
crusty company. Are they like the
Microsoft
2000s where they haven't had a
breakthrough product in a while?
People are not bright on the future of
Google and then chat GPT comes out.
>> Yeah. Wow. Which means if you were
bullish on Google back then and
contrarian, you could have invested at a
trillion dollar market cap.
>> Which is interesting. Like in October of
21, the market was saying that the
fourthcoming AI wave will not be a
strength for Google. Or maybe what it
was saying is we don't even know
anything about a forthcoming AI wave cuz
people are talking about AI, but they've
been talking about VR and they've been
talking about crypto and they've been
talking about all this frontier tech and
like that's not the future at all. This
company just feels slow and unadaptive.
and slow and unadaptive at that point in
history I think would have been a fair
characterization. They had an internal
chatbot, right?
>> Yes, they did. All right. So, before we
talk about chat GPT, Google had a
chatbot. So, Nom Shazir, incredible
engineer, rearchitected the transformer,
made it work, one of the lead authors of
the paper, storyried career within
Google, has all of this sway, should
have all of this sway within the
company. After the transformer paper
comes out, he and the rest of the team
are like, "Guys, we can use this for a
lot more than Google Translate." And in
fact, the last paragraph of the paper.
>> Are you about to read the transformer
paper?
>> Yes, I am. We are excited about the
future of attention-based models and
plan to apply them to other tasks. We
plan to extend the transformer to
problems involving input and output
modalities other than text and to
investigate large inputs and outputs
such as images, audio, and video. This
is in the paper.
>> Wow.
>> Google obviously does not do any of that
for quite a while. Gnome though
immediately starts advocating to Google
leadership, hey, I think this is going
to be so big. the transformer that we
should actually consider just throwing
out the search index and the 10 blue
links model and go all in on
transforming all of Google into one
giant transformer model. And then Gnome
actually goes ahead and builds a chatbot
interface to a large transformer model.
>> Is this Lambda?
>> This is before Lambda. Mina is what he
calls it.
>> And there is a chatbot in the like late
teens 2020 time frame that Gnome has
built within Google that arguably is
pretty close to chat GPT. Now, it
doesn't have any of the post-trading
safety that chat GPT does. So, it would
go off the rails.
>> Yeah. Someone told us that you could
just ask it who should die and it would
come up with names for you of people
that should die. It was not a shippable
product. It was a very raw, not safe,
not post-trained chatbot and model,
>> right? But it existed within Google and
they didn't ship it.
>> And technically, not only did it not
have post- training, it didn't have RLHF
either. This very core component of the
models today, the reinforcement learning
with human feedback that chat GPT, I
don't know if it had it in three, but it
did in 3.5 and it did for the launch of
ChatGpt. realistically it wasn't
launchable even if it was an open AI
thing cuz it was so bad. But a company
of Google stature certainly could not
take the risk. So strategically they
have this working against them. But
aside from the strategy thing, there's
two business model problems here. One,
if you're proposing drop the 10 blue
links and just turn google.com into a
giant AI chatbot, revenue drops when you
provide direct answers to questions
versus showing advertisers and letting
people click through to websites. That
upsets the whole Apple cart. Obviously,
they're thinking about it now, but until
2021, that was an absolute non-starter
to suggest something like that. Two,
there were legal risks of sitting in
between publishers and users. I mean,
Google at this point had spent decades
fighting the public perception and court
rulings that they were disintermediating
publishers from readers. So, there was
like a very high bar internally,
culturally to clear if you were going to
do something like this. Even those info
boxes that popped up that took until the
201s to make it happen, those really
were mostly on non-monetizable queries
anyway. So anytime that you were going
to say, "Hey, Google's going to provide
you an answer instead of 10 blue links,"
you had to have a bulletproof case for
it.
>> Yeah. And there was also a brand promise
and trust issue, too. Consumers
trusted Google so much for us even
today. You know, when I'm doing research
for acquired, we need to make sure we
get something right. I'm going to
Google.
>> I look something up in Claude. Yeah.
>> It gives me an answer. I'm like, that's
a really good answer. And then I verify
by searching Google that I can find
those facts too if I can't click through
the sources on Claude. That's my
workflow.
>> Which sort of sounds funny today, but
it's important. If you're going to
propose replacing the 10 blue links with
a chatbot, you need to be really damn
sure that it's going to be accurate.
>> Yes.
>> And in 2020 2021, that was definitely
not the case. Arguably still isn't the
case today. And there also wasn't a
compelling reason to do it because
nobody was really asking for this
product,
>> right?
>> Gnome knew and people in Google knew
that you could make a chatbot interface
to a transformer-based LLM and that was
a really compelling product. The general
public didn't know. Open AAI didn't even
really know. I mean GPT was out there.
>> Do you know the story of the launch of
Chat GPT? Well, I think I do. I have it
in my notes here.
>> All right. So, they've got GPT 3.5. It's
becoming very, very useful.
>> Yeah, this is late 2022. They've got
3.5,
>> but there's still this problem of how am
I supposed to actually use it? How is it
productized? And Sam just kind of says,
"We should make a chatbot. That seems
like a natural interface for this. Can
someone just make a chat?" And within
like a week internally,
>> someone makes a chat. They just turn
calls to the chat GBT 3.5 API into a
product where you're just chatting with
it. And every time you kick off a chat
message, it just calls GBT3.5 on the API
and that turns out to be this magic
product. I don't think they expected it.
I mean, servers are tipping over.
They're working with Microsoft to try to
get more compute. They're cutting deals
with Microsoft in real time to try to
get more investment to get more Azure
credits or get advances on their Azure
credits in order to handle the
incredible load in November of 2022
that's coming in of people wanting to
use this thing. They also just throw up
a payw wall randomly because they
thought that the business was going to
be an API business. They thought that
the projections were all about how much
revenue they were going to do through
B2B licensing deals and then they just
realized, oh, there's all these
consumers trying to use this. Put up a
payw wall to at least dampen the most
expensive use of this thing so we can
kind of offset the cost or slow the roll
out,
>> right? This isn't uh Google search, you
know, 89% gross margin stuff here,
>> right? So they end up having incredibly
fast revenue take off just from the
quick stripe payw wall that they threw
up over a weekend to handle all the
demand. So to say that OpenAI had any
idea what was coming would also be
completely false. They did not get that
this would be the next big consumer
product when they launched it.
>> Ben Thompson loves to call Open AAI the
accidental consumer tech company, right?
>> Yes,
>> it was definitely accidental. Now there
is actually another slightly different
version of the motivation for launching
the chat.
>> Is this the Daario
>> interface? Yeah, the Daario and
Anthropic version. So Anthropic was
working on what would become Claude and
rumors were out there and people at
OpenAI got wind of like, oh hey,
Anthropic and Daario are working on a
chat interface.
We should probably do one, too. and if
we're going to do one, we should
probably launch it before they launch
theirs. So, I think that had something
to do with the timing, but again, I
don't think anybody including OpenAI
realized what was going to happen, which
is Ben, you alluded to it, but to give
the actual numbers, on November 30th,
2022,
>> basically Thanksgiving,
>> OpenAI launches a research preview of an
interface to the new GPT 3.5 called
ChatGpt.
That morning on the 30th, Sam Alman
tweets, "Today we launched ChatGpt. Try
talking with it here." And then a link
to chat.
Within a week, less than a week
actually, it gets 1 million users. By
the end of the year, so you know, one
month later, December 31st, 2022, it has
30 million users. By the end of the next
month, by the end of January 23, so two
months after launch, it crosses 100
million registered users. The fastest
product in history to hit that
milestone. Completely insane. Completely
insane. Before we talk about what that
unleashes within Google, which is the
famous code red, to rewind a little bit
back to Gnome and the chatbot within
Google, Mina, Google does keep working
on Mina. They develop it into something
called Lambda, which is also a chatbot,
also internal.
>> I think it was a language model. At this
point in time, they still differentiated
between the underlying model brand name
and the application name.
>> Yes, Lambda was the model and then there
also was a chat interface to Lambda that
was internal for Google use only. Gnome
is still advocating to leadership, we
got to release this thing. He leaves in
2021 and founds a chatbot company,
Character AI, that still exists to this
day. And they raise a lot of money, as
you would expect. And then Google
ultimately in 2024 after ChatGpt
launches, pays $2.7 billion, I think, to
do a licensing deal with Character AI,
the net of which Gnome comes back to
Google. Yeah, I think Larry and Sergey
were like, if we're going to compete
seriously, we kind of need Gnome back
and blank check to go get him.
>> Yeah. So, throughout 2021 2022, Google's
working on the Lambda model and then the
chat interface to it. In May of 2022,
they do release something that is
available to the public called AI test
kitchen, which is a AI product test area
where people can play around with
Google's internal AI products, including
the Lambda chat interface.
>> Yep. And all fairness, predates Chat
GPT.
>> Do you know what they do to nerf chat so
that it doesn't go too far off the
rails? This is amazing.
>> No. For the version of Lambda chat that
is in AI test kitchen, they stop all
conversations after five turns. So you
can only have five turns of conversation
with the chatbot and then it's just and
we're done for today. Thank you.
Goodbye.
>> Oh wow.
>> And the reason they did that was for
safety of like, you know, if the more
turns you had with it, the more likely
it would start to go off the rails.
>> And honestly, it was a fair concern. I
mean, this thing was not for public
consumption. And if you remember back a
few years before, Microsoft released
Tay, which was this crazy racist
chatbot.
>> Yeah. They launched it as a Twitter bot,
right? And it was going off the rails on
Twitter. This was in 2016, I think.
>> Right. Maximal impact of badness.
>> Yeah. And so despite Google all the way
back in 2017 Sundar declared we are an
AI first company is being understandably
very cautious in real public AI launches
especially on consumerf facing things.
>> Yep. And as far as anyone else is
concerned before chat GPT they are an AI
first company and they're launching all
this amazing AI stuff. It's just within
the vector of their existing products.
Right? So chat GPD comes out becomes the
fastest product in history to 100
million users. It is immediately obvious
to Sundar, Larry, Sergey, all of Google
leadership that this is an existential
threat to Google. Chat GPT is a better
user experience to do the same job
function that Google search does. And to
underscore this, so if you didn't know
it in November of 22, you sure knew it
by February of 23 because good old
Microsoft, our biggest scariest enemy.
Oh yeah.
>> announces a new Bing powered by OpenAI.
And Satia has a quote. It's a new day
for search. The race starts today.
There's an announcement of a new AI
powered search page. He says, "We want
to rethink what search was meant to be
in the first place. In fact, Google's
success in the initial days came by
reimagining what could be done in
search. And I think the AI era we're
entering gets us to think about it. This
is the worst possible thing that could
happen to Google. That now Microsoft can
actually challenge Google on their own
turf intent on the internet with a
legitimately
different, better, differentiated
product vector. Not what Bing was trying
to do, copycat. This is the full leaprog
and they have the technology partnership
to do it.
>> Or so everybody thinks at the moment.
>> Oh my god, terrifying. This is when
Satia says the quote in an interview
around this launch with Bing. I want
people to know that we made Google
dance.
Oh boy. Well, hey, if you come at the
king, you'd best not miss,
>> right?
>> And this big launch kind of misses.
>> Yes. So what happens in Google December
2022 even before the big launch but
after the chat GPT moment Sundar issues
a code red within the company
>> and what does that mean?
>> Up until this point Google and Sundar
and Larry and everyone had been thinking
about AI as a sustaining innovation in
Klay Christensen's terms. This is great
for Google. This is great for our
products. Look at all these amazing
things that we're doing. It further
entrenches incumbents.
>> It further is entrenching our lead in
all of our already leading products.
>> We can deploy more capital in a
predictable way to either drive down
costs or make our product experiences
that much better than any startup could
make.
>> Got more monetized that much better. All
the things. Once chat GPT comes out on a
dime overnight, AI shifts from being a
sustaining innovation to a disruptive
innovation. It is now an existential
threat. And many of Google's strengths
from the last 10, 15, 20 years of all
the AI work that's happened in the
company are now liabilities. They have a
lot of existing castles to protect.
>> That's right. They have to run
everything through a lot of filters
before they can decide if it's a good
idea to go try to out open AAI open AAI.
>> Yep. So this code red that Sundar issues
to the company is actually a huge moment
because what it means and what he says
is we need to build and ship real native
AI products ASAP. This is actually what
you need to do in the textbook response
to a disruptive innovation as the
incumbent. You need to not bury your
head in the sand and you need to say,
"Okay, we need to like actually go build
and ship products that are comparable to
these disruptive innovators." And you
need to be laser operationally
in all the details to try and figure out
where is it that the new product is
actually cannibalizing our old product
and where is it that the new product can
be complimentary and just lean into all
the ways in which you can be
complimentary in all the different
little scenarios. And really what
they've been trying to do, this ballet
from 2022 onward, is protect the growth
of search while also creating the best
AI experiences they can. And so it's
very clever the way that they do AI
overviews for some but not all queries.
And they have AI mode for some but not
all users. And then they have Gemini,
the full AI app, but they're not
redirecting Google.com to Gemini. It's
this like very delicate dance of
protecting the existing franchise while
also building a hopefully
non-cannibalizing as much as we can new
franchise.
>> Yep. And you see them really going hard
and I think building leading products in
nonarch cannibalizing categories like
video,
>> right? V3 or nano banana. These are
things that don't in any way cannibalize
the existing franchise. They in fact use
some of Google's strength, all the
YouTube training data and stuff like
that.
>> Yeah. So, what happens next? As you
might expect, it gets worse before it
gets better.
Code Red goes out December 2022.
>> Bard baby launch Bard.
>> Oh boy. Well, even before that, January
23, when OpenAI hits 100 million
registered users for ChatGpt, Microsoft
announces they are investing another $10
billion in OpenAI and says that they now
own 49% of the for-profit entity.
Incredible in and of itself. But then
now think about this from the Google
lens of Microsoft, our enemy. They now
arguably own obviously in retrospect
here they don't own open AAI but it
seems at the time like oh my god
Microsoft might now own open AI which is
our first true existential threat in our
history as a company.
>> Not great Bob.
>> So then February 2023 the Bing
integration launches. Satia has the
quote about wanting to make Google
dance. Meanwhile Google is scrambling
internally to launch AI products as fast
as possible. So the first thing they do
is they take the Lambda model and the
chatbot interface to it. They rebrand it
as Bard.
>> They ship that publicly
>> and they release it immediately.
February 2023, ship it publicly.
Available GA to anyone,
>> which maybe was the right move, but god
it was a bad product.
>> It was really bad.
>> I didn't know the term at the time,
RLHF, but it was clear it was missing a
component of some magic that ChatGpt
had. this reinforcement learning with
human feedback where you could really
tune the appropriateness, the tone, the
voice, the sort of correctness of the
responses, it just wasn't there.
>> Yep. So, to make matters worse, in the
launch video for Bard, a video, this is
a choreographed pre-recorded video where
they're showing conversations with Bard.
Bard gives an inaccurate factual
response to one of the queries that they
include in the video.
>> This is one of the worst keynotes in
history.
>> After the Bard launch and this keynote,
Google's stock drops 8% on that day. And
then like we were saying, once the
actual product comes out, it becomes
clear it's just not good.
>> Yep.
>> And it pretty quickly becomes clear,
it's not just that the chatbot isn't
good, it's the model isn't good. So in
May they replace Lambda with a new model
from the Brain team called Palm. It's a
little bit better, but it's still
clearly behind not only GPT3.5, but in
March of 2023, OpenAI comes out with
GPT4, which is even better.
>> You can access that now through chatgpt.
And here is where Sundar makes two
really, really big decisions. Number
one, he says, "We cannot have two AI
teams within Google anymore. We're
merging Brain and Deep Mind into one
entity called Google Deep Mind,
>> which is a giant deal. This is in full
violation of the original deal terms of
bringing Deep Mind in."
>> Yep. And the way he makes it work is he
says, "Demis, you are now CEO of the AI
division of Google, Google DeepMind.
This is all hands on deck and you and
Deep Mind are going to lead the charge.
You're going to integrate with Google
Brain and we need to change all of the
past 10 years of culture around building
and shipping AI products within Google."
To further illustrate this, when
Alphabet became Alphabet, they had all
these separate companies, but things
that were really core to Google, like
YouTube actually stayed a part of
Google. DeepMind was its own company.
That's how separate this was. They're
working on their own models. In fact,
those models are predicated on
reinforcement learning. That was the big
thing that DeepMind had been working on
the whole time. And so reading in
between the lines, it's Sundar looking
at his two AI labs and going, "Look, I
know you two don't actually get along
that well, but look, I don't care that
you had different charters before. I am
taking the responsibility of Google
Brain and giving it to DeepMind and
DeepMind is absorbing the Google Brain
team." I think that's what you should
sort of read into it because as you look
at where the models went from here, they
kind of came from DeepMind.
>> Yep. There's a little bit of interesting
backstory to this too. So Mustafa
Sullean, the third co-founder of
DeepMind,
at some point before this,
>> he became like the head of Google AI
policy or something.
>> He had already shifted over to Brain and
to Google.
>> He stayed there for a little while and
then he ended up getting close with who
else? Reed Hoffman. Remember Reed is on
the ethics board for DeepMind and
Mustafa and Reed leave and go found
Inflection AI which fast forward now
into 2024 after the absolute insanity
that goes down at OpenAI in Thanksgiving
2023 when Sam Alman gets fired over the
weekend during Thanksgiving and then
brought back by Monday when all the team
threatened to quit and go to Microsoft.
Open eye loves Thanksgiving. Can't wait
for this year.
>> They love Thanksgiving. Yeah. Gosh.
After all that, which certainly strains
the Microsoft relationship, remember
again, Reed is on the board of
Microsoft. Microsoft does one of these
acquisition type deals with Inflection
AI and brings Mustafa in as the head of
AI for Microsoft.
>> Crazy.
>> Wild, right? Just wild.
>> Crazy turn of events. Okay, so that
first big decision that Sundar makes is
unifying deep mind and brain. That was
huge. Equally big, he says, I want you
guys to go make a new model and we're
just going to have one model that is
going to be the model for all of Google
internally for all of our AI products
externally. It's going to be called
Gemini. No more different models, no
more different teams. just one model for
everything. This is also a huge deal.
>> It's a giant deal and it's twofold. It's
push and it's pull. It's saying, "Hey,
if anyone's got a need for an AI model,
you got to start using Gemini." But two,
it's actually kind of the plus thing
where they go to every team and they
start saying, "Gemini is our future. You
need to start looking for ways to
integrate Gemini into your product."
>> Yes, I'm so glad you brought up Plus.
This came up with a few folks I spoke to
in the research. Obviously, this is all
playing out real time, but the point a
lot of people at Google made is the
Gemini situation is very different than
the Google+ situation. This is a
technical thing, A, which has always
been Google's wheelhouse, but B, even
more importantly, this is the rational
business thing to do in the age of these
huge models. Even for a company like
Google, there are massive scaling laws
to models.
>> The more data you put in, the better
it's going to get, the better all the
outputs are going to be.
>> And because of scaling laws, you need
your models to be as big as possible in
order to have the best performance
possible. If you're trying to maintain
multiple models within a company, you're
repeating multiple huge costs to
maintain huge models. You definitely
don't want to do that. You need to
centralize on just one model.
>> Yeah, it's interesting. There's also
something to read into where at first it
was the Gemini model underneath the Bard
product. Bard was still the consumer
name. Then at some point they said, "No,
we're just calling it all Gemini and
Gemini became the userfacing name."
Also, this pulls in my quintessence from
the Alphabet episode. I know it's a
little bit woowoo, but with Google
saying, "We're actually going to name
the consumer service the name of the AI
model." They're sort of admitting to
themselves, this product is nothing but
technology. There isn't productiness to
do on top of it. It's just like Gmail.
Gmail was technology. It was fast
search. It was lots of storage. It was
use it in the web. The productiness
wasn't particular the way that like
Instagram was all about the product.
Gemini the model, Gemini, the chatbot
says, "We're just exposing our amazing
breakthrough technology to you all and
you get to interface directly with it."
Anthropologically looking from afar, it
kind of feels like it's that principle
at work. I totally agree. I think it's
actually a really important branding
point and sort of rallying point to
Google and Google culture to do this,
>> right? All right, so this is all the
stuff going on in Google 2023ish
in AI. Before we catch up to the
present, I have a whole other branch of
Alphabet that has been a real bright
spot for AI. Can I go there? Can I take
this offramp, if you will?
>> Can you uh take the wheel, so to speak?
>> May I take the wheel? May I investigate
another bet?
>> Yeah, please tell us the Whimo story.
>> Awesome. So, we got to rewind back all
the way to 2004, the DARPA Grand
Challenge, which was created as a way to
spur research into autonomous ground
robots for military use. And actually,
what it did for our purposes here today
is create the seed talent for the entire
self-driving car revolution 20 years
later. So, the competition itself is
really cool. There is a 132m raceourse.
Now, mind you, this is 2004 in the
Mojave Desert that the cars have to race
on. It is a dirt road. No humans are
allowed to be in or interact with the
cars. They are monitored 100% remotely.
And the winner gets $1 million.
>> $1 million,
>> which was a break from policy. Normally,
these are grants, not prize money. So,
this needs to be authorized by an act of
Congress. The $1 million eventually felt
comical. So the second year they raised
the pot to $2 million. It's crazy
thinking about what these researchers
are worth today. That that was the prize
for the whole thing. So the first year
in 2004 went fine. There were some
amazing tech demonstrations on these
really tight budgets, but ultimately
zero of the 100 registered teams
finished the race. But the next year in
2005 was the real special year. The
progress that the entire industry made
in those first 12 months from what they
learned is totally insane. Of the 23
finalists that were entering the
competition, 22 of them made it past the
spot where the furthest team the year
before had made it. The amount that the
field advanced in that one year is
insane. Not only that, five of those
teams actually finished all 132 miles.
Two of them were from Carnegie Melon and
one was from Stanford, led by a name
that all of you will now recognize,
Sebastian Thrun.
>> Indeed,
>> this is Sebastian's origin story before
Google. Now, as we said, Sebastian was
kind enough to help us with prep for
this episode, but I actually learned
most of this from watching a 20-year-old
NOVA documentary that is available on
Amazon Prime Video. Thanks to Brett
Taylor for giving us the tip on where to
find this documentary. Yes, the hot
research tip.
>> So, what was special about this Stanford
team? Well, one, there's a huge problem
with noisy data that comes out of all of
these sensors. You know, it's in a car
in the desert getting rocked around.
It's in the heat. It's in the sun. So,
common wisdom and what Carnegie Melon
did was to do as much as you possibly
can on the hardware to mitigate that. So
things like custom rigging and gimbals
and giant springs to stabilize the
sensors. Carnegie Melon would
essentially buy a Hummer and rip it
apart and rebuild it from the wheels up.
We're talking like welding and real
construction on a car. The Stanford team
did the exact opposite. They viewed any
new piece of hardware as something that
could fail. And so in order to mitigate
risks on race day, they used all
commodity cameras and sensors that they
just mounted on a nearly unmodified
Volkswagen. So they only innovated in
software and they figured they would
just kind of come up with clever
algorithms to help them clean up the
messy data later. Very googly, right?
>> Very googly.
>> The second thing they did was an early
use of machine learning to combine
multiple sensors. They mounted laser
hardware on the roof just like what
other teams were doing. And this is the
way that you can measure texture and
depth of what is right in front of you.
And the data, it's super precise, but
you can't drive very fast because you
don't really know much about what's far
away since it's this fixed field of
view. It's very narrow. Essentially, you
can't answer that question of how fast
can I drive or is there a turn coming
up. So, on top of that, the way they
solved it was they also mounted a
regular video camera. That camera can
see a pretty wide field of view just
like the human eye, and it can see all
the way to the horizon just like the
human eye. And crucially, it could see
color. So what it would do, this is like
really clever. They would use a machine
learning algorithm in real time in 2005.
This computer is like sitting in the
middle of the car. They would overlay
the data from the lasers on top onto the
camera feed. And from the lasers, you
would know if the area right in front of
the car was okay to drive or not. Then
the algorithm would look up in the
frames coming off the camera overlaid
what color that safe area was and then
extrapolate by looking further ahead at
other parts of the video frame to see
where that safe area extended to
>> so you could figure out your safe path
through the desert.
>> That's awesome.
>> It's so awesome.
>> I'm imagining like a Dell PC sitting in
the middle of this car in 2005.
>> It's not far off. In the email that we
send out, we'll share some photos of it.
It could then drive faster with more
confidence and it knew when turns were
coming up. Again, this is real time on
board the camera. 2005 is wild on that
tech. So ultimately, both of these bets
worked and the Stanford team won in
super dramatic fashion. They actually
passed one of the Carnegie Melon teams
autonomously through the desert. It's
like this big dramatic moment in the
documentary. So you would kind of think,
so then Sebastian goes to Google and
builds Whimo. No. As we talked about
earlier, he does join Google through
that crazy, please don't raise money
from Benchmark and Sequoia and we'll
just hire you instead. But he goes and
works on Street View and Project Ground
Truth and co-founds Google X. David, as
you were alluding to earlier, this
project chauffeur that would become
Whimo is the first project inside Google
X. And I think the story, right, is that
Larry came to Sebastian and was like,
"Yes, yo, that self-driving car stuff,
like, do it." And Sebastian was like,
"No, come on. That was a DARPA
challenge." And Larry's like, "No, no,
you should do it." He's like, "No, no,
that won't be safe. There's people
running around cities. I'm not just
going to put multi-tonon killer robots
on roads and go and potentially harm
people." And Larry finally comes to him
and says, "Why? What is the technical
reason that this is impossible?" And
Sebastian goes home, has sleep on it,
and he comes in the next morning and he
goes, "I realized what it was. I'm just
afraid."
>> Such a good moment.
>> So they start, he's like, "There's not a
technical reason. As long as we can take
all the right precautions and hold a
very high bar on safety, let's get to
work." So Larry then goes, "Great. I'll
give you a benchmark so that way you
know if you're succeeding." He comes up
with these 10 stretches of road in
California that he thinks will be very
difficult to drive. It's about a
thousand miles and the team starts
calling it the Larry 1000 and it
includes driving to Tahoe, Lumbard
Street in San Francisco, Highway 1 to
Los Angeles, the Bay Bridge. This is the
bogey.
>> Yep. If you can autonomously drive these
stretches of road, pretty good
indication that you can probably do
anything.
>> Yep. So they start the project in 2009.
Within 18 months, this tiny team, I
think they hired, I don't know, it's
like a dozen people or something,
they've driven thousands of miles
autonomously, and they managed to
succeed in the full Larry 1000 within 18
months.
>> Totally unreal how fast they did it. And
then also totally unreal how long it
takes after that to productize and
create the Whimo that we know today.
>> Right. It's like the first 99% and then
the second 99% that takes 10 years.
>> Yeah. Self-driving is one of these
really tricky types of problems where
it's surprisingly easy to get started
even though it seems like it would be an
impossible thing. But then there's edge
cases everywhere. Weather, road
conditions, other drivers, novel road
layouts, night driving. So it takes this
massive amount of work for a production
system to actually happen. So then the
question is what business do we build?
What is the product here? And there was
what Sebastian wanted which was highway
assist. Sort of the lowest stakes, most
realistic. Let's make a better cruise
control. There's what Eric Schmidt
wanted, which is crazy. He proposed, oh,
let's just go buy Tesla and that'll be
our starting place and then we'll just
put all of our self-driving equipment on
all the cars. David, do you know what it
would have cost to buy Tesla at the
time?
>> I think at the time that negotiations
were taking place between Elon and Larry
and Google, this was in the depths of
the Model S production scaling wos. I
think Google could have bought the
company for $5 billion. That's what I
remember.
>> It was three billion.
>> $3 billion. Oh my goodness.
>> Obviously, that didn't happen, but what
a crazy alternative history that could
have been,
>> right? I mean, I think if that had
happened, DeepMind would not have gone
down in the same way and probably OpenAI
would not have gotten founded.
>> That's probably right.
>> I think that is obviously unprovable,
>> right? The counterfactuals that we
always come up with on this show, you
can't know.
>> Yeah. Seems more likely than not to me
that at a minimum, Open AAI would not
exist,
>> right? So, then there was what Larry
wanted to do. Option three, build robo
taxis. Yeah.
>> And ultimately that is at least right
now what they would end up doing. So we
could do a whole episode about this
journey, but we will just hit some of
the major points for the sake of time.
The big thing to keep in mind here,
neither Google nor the public really
knew if self-driving was something that
could happen in the next 2 years from
any given point or take another 10. And
just to illustrate it, for the first 5
years of project chauffeur, it did not
use deep learning at all. They did the
Larry 1000 without any deep learning and
then went another three and a half
years.
>> Wow, that's crazy.
>> Yeah. And yet totally illustrates you
never know how far away the end goal is.
>> And this is a field that comes from the
only way progress happens is through
these series of breakthroughs. and you
don't know a how far the next
breakthrough is because at any given
time there's lots of promising things in
the field most of which don't work out
and then b when there is a breakthrough
actually how much lift that will give
you over existing methods so anytime
people are forecasting oh in AI we're
going to be able to do xyz in x years
it's a complete fool's errand even the
experts don't know here are the big
milestones 2013 they started using
convolutional neural nets they could
identify objects they got much better
perception capabilities this 2013 2014
period is when Google found religion
around deep learning. So this is like
right after the 40,000 GPUs rolled out.
So they've actually got some hardware to
start doing this on now. 2016 they've
seen enough technology proof that they
think let's commercialize this. We can
actually spin this out into a company.
So Whimo becomes its own subsidiary
inside of Alphabet. It's no longer a
part of Google X anymore. 2017 obviously
the transformer comes out. They
incorporate some learnings from the
transformer especially around prediction
and planning. March of 2020, they raised
$3.2 billion from folks like Silverlake
Canada Pension and Investment Board,
Mubatala, Andrea Horowitz, and of
course, the biggest check, I think,
Alphabet. And I think they're always the
biggest check because Alphabet is still
the majority owner, even after a bunch
more fundraises. In October of 2020,
they launched the first public
commercial, no human behind the driver's
seat thing in Phoenix. It's the first in
the world. This is 11 years after
succeeding in the Larry 1000. And this
is nuts. I had given up at this point. I
was like, that's cute that Whimo and all
these other companies are trying to do
self-driving. Seems like it's never
going to happen. And then they actually
were doing a large volume of rides
safely with consumers and charging money
for it in Phoenix.
>> Then they bring it to San Francisco
where for me and lots of people in San
Francisco, it is a huge part of life in
the city here now. It's amazing. Yeah,
every time I'm down, I love taking them.
They're launching in Seattle soon. I'm
pumped. Interestingly, they don't make
the hardware. So, they use a Jaguar
vehicle. Yep. That from what I can tell
is only in Whimos. Like, I don't know if
anybody else drives that Jaguar or if
you can buy it, but they're working on a
sort of van next. They have some next
generation hardware. For anyone who
hasn't taken it, it's an Uber, but with
no driver. And that launched in June of
24. Along the way there, they raised
their quote unquote series B, another
2.5 billion. Then after the San
Francisco roll out, they raised their
quote unquote series C, 5.6 billion.
This year in January, they were
reportedly doing more in gross bookings
than Lyft in San Francisco. Wow. I
totally believe it. I mean, it is the
number one option in San Francisco that
I and everybody I know to always goes to
for ride hailing. It's like try to get a
Whimo. if there's not a Whimo available
anytime soon, you know, then go down the
stack.
>> Like we're living in the future and how
quickly we fail to appreciate it.
>> Yeah. And what's cool, I think, for
people who it hasn't come to their city
and is not part of their lives yet, it's
not just that it's a cool experience to
not have a driver behind the like pretty
quickly that just fades. It's actually a
different experience. M
>> so if I need to go somewhere with my
older daughter, I don't mind hailing a
Whimo, bringing the car seat, installing
the car seat in the Whimo and driving
with my daughter and she loves it. We
call it a robot car and she's like, "A
robot car? I'm so excited."
>> Huh.
>> I would never do that with an Uber.
>> That's interesting.
>> To my dog, whenever I need to go with my
dog, like it's super awkward to hail an
Uber and be like, "Hey, I got my dog.
You know, can the dog come in it?" Not a
big deal with a Whimo. And then when
you're in town,
>> Yeah. we can actually have sensitive
conversations in the car.
>> You can have phone calls. It really is a
different experience.
>> Yeah, that's so true. Yeah. So, may as
well catch up to today. They're
operating in five cities, Phoenix, San
Francisco, LA, Austin, and Atlanta. They
have hundreds of thousands of paid rides
every week. They've now driven over a
100 million miles with no human behind
the wheel, growing at 2 million every
week. There's over 10 million paid rides
across 2,000 vehicles in the fleet.
They're going to be opening a bunch more
cities in the US next year. They're
launching in Tokyo, their first
international city, slowly and then all
at once. I mean, that's kind of the
lesson here. The technology, they really
continued with that multi-ensor approach
all the way from the DARPA Grand
Challenge. Camera, LAR, they added radar
and actually they use audio sensing as
well. And their approach is basically
any data that we can gather is better
because that makes it safer. So they
have 13 cameras, four LAR, six radar,
and the array of external microphones.
This is obviously way more expensive of
a solution than what Tesla is just doing
with cameras. But Whimo's party line is
they believe it is the only path to full
autonomy to hit the safety bar and
regulatory bar that they're aiming for.
>> Yeah.
>> It seems like a really big line in the
sand for them anytime you talk to
somebody in that organization.
>> Yeah. And look, as a regular user of
both products, you know, happy owner and
driver of a Model Y in addition to
regular Waybo user, at least with the
current instantiation of full
self-driving on my Tesla, vastly
different products. Full self-driving on
my Model Y is great. I use it all the
time on the freeway, but I would never
not pay attention. Whereas, every time I
get in a Whimo, it's almost like Google
search, right? It's like I just trust
that, oh, this is going to be completely
and totally safe and I'm sitting in the
back seat and I can totally tune out.
>> I think I trust my Model Y FSD more than
you do. But I get what you're saying and
frankly regulatory you are required to
still pay attention in Tesla and not in
the Whimo. The safety thing is super
real though. I mean, if you look at the
numbers, over a million motor vehicle
crashes cause fatalities every year or
there's over a million fatalities in the
US alone. Over 40,000 deaths occur per
year. So if you break that down, that's
120 every day. That's like a giant cause
of death.
>> Yes.
>> The study that Whimo just released last
month showed that they have 91% fewer
crashes with serious injuries or worse
compared to the average human driver,
even controlled for the fact that Whimos
right now are only driving on city
surface streets. So they controlled it
apples to apples with human driving
data. And it's a 91% reduction in those
serious either fatality or a serious
injury things. Why aren't we all talking
about this all the time every day? This
is going to completely change the world
and a giant cause of death.
>> Yeah.
>> So, while we're in Whimo land, what do
you think about doing some quick
analysis?
>> Great.
>> Cuz I've been scratching my head here of
what is this business? Then I promise
we'll go back to the rest of Google AI
and catch up to today. It is super
expensive to operate especially at early
scale. The training is high, the
inference is high, the hardware is high
etc etc etc.
>> Also the operations are expensive.
>> Yes. And in fact they're experimenting.
Some cities they actually outsource the
operations. So the fleet is managed by
there's a rental car company in Texas
that manages it or they've partnered I
believe with Lyft and with Uber and
different. So they're trying all sorts
of O and O versus uh partnership models
to operate it.
>> Yeah. And the operations are like these
are electric cars. They need to be
charged. They need to be cleaned. They
need to be returned to depots. They need
to be checked out. They need to have
sensors replaced.
>> So the question is what is the potential
market opportunity? How big could this
business be? And there's a few different
ways you could try to quantify it. One
total market size thing you could do is
try to sum the entire automaker
market cap today and that would be 2.5
trillion globally if you include Tesla
or 1.3 trillion without but Whimo is not
really making cars so that's probably
the wrong way to slice it. You could
look at all the ride sharing companies
today which might be a better comp
because that's the business that Whimo
is actually in today. That's on the
order of 300 billion most of which is
Uber.
>> Yep. So that's addressable market cap
today with ride sharing. Whimo's
ambitions though are bigger than that.
They want to be in the cars that you
own. They want to be in long haul
trucking. So they believe they can grow
the share of transportation because
there's blind people that could own a
car. There's elderly people who could
get where they need to go on their own
without having a driver. That sort of
thing. So the most squishy but I think
the most interesting way to look at it
is what is the value from all of the
reduction in accidents because that's
really what they're doing. It's a
product to replace accidents with
non-acs.
>> I think that's viable but again I would
say as a regular user of the product it
is a different and expanding product to
human ride share. So your argument is
whatever number I come up with for
reducing accidents, it's still a bigger
market than that because there's
additional value created in the product
experience itself.
>> Yeah. Scoping just to ride share now
that we have Whimo in San Francisco. I
use Whimo in scenarios where I would
never use an Uber or a Lyft.
>> Yeah, makes sense. So here's the data we
have. The CDC released a report saying
deaths from crashes in 2022 in the US
resulted in $470 billion in total costs,
including medical costs and the cost
estimates for lives lost, which is crazy
that the CDC has some way of putting the
costs on human life, but they do. So, if
you reduce crashes 10x, which is what
Whimo seems to be saying in their data,
at least for the serious crashes, that's
over $420 billion a year in total costs
that we would save as a nation. Now,
it's not totally apples to apples. I
recognize this, but that cost savings is
more than Google does today in revenue
in their entire business. You could see
a path to a Google sized opportunity for
Whimo as a standalone company just
through this analysis as long as they
figure out a way to get cost down to the
point where they can run this as a large
and profitable business. Yeah, it is a
incredible
20 plus year success story within
Google.
>> The way I want to close it is the
investment so far actually hasn't been
that large. When you consider this
opportunity, they have burned somewhere
in the neighborhood of 10 to 15 billion.
That's sort of why I was listing all the
investments to get to this point.
>> Jump change compared to foundational
models.
>> Dude, also let's just keep it scoped in
this sector. That's one year of Uber's
profits.
>> Wow. Seems like a good bet.
>> I used to think this was like some wild
goose chase. It now looks really, really
smart.
>> Yep. Totally agree.
>> Also, that cost 10 to 15 billion is the
profits that Google made last month.
>> Google. Well, speaking of Google, should
we catch us up to today with Google AI?
>> Yes. So, I think where you were is the
Gemini launch.
>> So, Sundar makes these two decrees mid
2023. One, we're merging Brain and Deep
Mind into one team for AI within Google.
And two, we're gonna standardize on one
model, the future Gemini and Deep
Mindbrain
team. You go build it and then everybody
in Google, you're going to use it.
>> Not to mention, apparently Sergey Bran
is like now back as an employee working
on Gemini.
>> Yes.
Employee number
>> got his badge back.
>> Yeah. Got his badge back.
So once Sundar makes these decisions,
Jeff Dean and Oriel Vignalis from Brain
go over and team up with the Deep Mind
team and they start working on Gemini.
>> I'm a believer now. By the way, you got
Jeff Dean working on it, I'm in.
>> If you got Jeff Dean on it, it's
probably going to work. If you weren't a
believer yet, wait till I'm going to
tell you next. Once they get Noom back
when they do the deal with Character AI,
bring him back into the fold.
Gnome joins the Gemini team and Jeff and
Gnome are the two co-technical leads for
Gemini now. So,
>> let's go.
>> Let's go. So, they actually announced
this very quickly at the Google IO
keynote in May 2023. They announced
Gemini. They announced the plans. They
also launch AI overviews in search first
as a labs product and then later that
becomes just standard for everybody
using Google search which is crazy by
the way the number of Google searches
that happen is unfathomably large I'm
sure there's a number for it but just
think about that's about the highest
level of computing scale that exists
other than like high bandwidth things
like streaming but just think about the
instances of Google searches that happen
they are running an LLM inference
on all of those or at least as many as
they're willing to show AI overviews on
which I'm sure is not every query but
many
>> a subset.
>> Yeah.
>> But still a large large number of Google
I mean I see them all the time.
>> Yep.
>> This is really Google immediately
deciding to operate at AI speed. I mean
chat GPT happened in November 30th 2022.
We're now in May 2023.
All of these decisions have been made.
all of these changes have happened and
they're announcing things at IO
>> and they're really flexing the
infrastructure that they've got. I mean
the fact that they can go like oh yeah
sure let's do inference on every query
we're Google we can handle it.
>> So a key part of this new Gemini model
that they announced in May 2023 is it's
going to be multimodal. Again this is
one model for everything text images
video audio one model. They release it
for early public access in December
2023. So also crazy 6 months. They build
it, they trade it, they release it.
>> That is amazing.
>> While February 2024, they launched
Gemini 1.5 with a 1 million token
context window. Much much larger context
window than any other model on the
market,
>> which enables all sorts of new use
cases. There's all these people who were
like, "Oh, I tried to use AI before, but
it couldn't handle my XYZ use case." Now
they can.
>> Yep. The next year, February 2025, they
release Gemini 2.0. March of 2025, one
month later, they launch Gemini 2.5 Pro
in experimental mode. And then that goes
G in June.
>> This is like Nvidia pace, how often
they're shipping.
>> Yeah, seriously. And also in March of
2025, they launch AI mode. So you can
now switch over on google.com to chatbot
mode.
>> And they're split testing auto opting
some people into AI mode to see what the
response is. This is the golden goose.
>> Yeah, the elephant is tap dancing here.
>> Yep.
>> Then there's all the other AI products
that they launch. So Notebook LM comes
out during this period. AI generated
podcasts
>> which does that sound like us to you? It
feels a little trained.
>> The number of texts that we got when
that came out of this must be trained on
acquired.
>> I do know that a bunch of folks on the
notebook LM team are acquired fans. So I
don't know if they trained on us. And
then there's the video the image stuff
VO3 Nano Banana Genie 3 that just came
out recently. Genie, this is insane. And
this is a world builder based on prompts
and videos.
>> Yeah. You haven't actually used it yet,
right? You watch that hype video.
>> Yeah, I watched the video. I haven't
actually used it.
>> Yeah. I mean, if it does that, that's
unbelievable. It's a real time
generative
>> world builder.
>> World builder. Yeah. You look right and
it invents stuff to your right. I mean,
you combine that with like a vision pro
hardware, you're just living in a
fantasy land. So, they announced there
are now 450 million monthly users of
Gemini. Now, that includes everybody
who's accessing Nano Banana.
>> Yeah, I can't believe this stat. This is
insane. Even with recently being number
one in the app store, it still feels
hard to believe. Google's saying it, so
it must be true. But I just wonder what
are they counting as use cases of the
Gemini app,
>> right? Certainly everybody who's using
Nano Banana is using Gemini.
>> But is it counting AI overviews or is it
counting AI mode or is it counting
something where I'm like accidentally
like Meta said that crazy high number of
people using Meta AI and
>> Right. Right. Right.
>> That was complete garbage. That was
people searching Instagram who
accidentally hit a llama model that made
some things happen and they were like,
"Uh, go away. I actually am just looking
for a user." Is it really 450 million or
is it 450 million?
>> Yeah, good question. Either way, going
from zero is crazy impressive in the
amount of time that they have done,
>> especially given revenue is at an
all-time high. They seem to so far be at
least in this squishy early phase able
to figure out how to keep the core
business going while doing well as a
competitor in the cutting edge of AI.
>> Yeah. And to foreshadow a little bit to
we're going to do a bull and bear here
in a minute. As we talked about in our
Alphabet episode, Google does have a
history of navigating platform shifts
incredibly well in the transition to
mobile.
>> It's true.
>> Definitely a rockier start here in the
AI platform shift.
Much rockier. But hey, look, I mean, if
you were to lay out a recipe for how to
respond given the rocky start, be hard
to come up with a much better slate of
things than what they've done over the
last two years.
>> Yeah.
All right. Should I give us the snapshot
of the business today?
>> Give us the snapshot of the business
today. Oh, yeah. Also, by the way, the
federal government decided they were a
monopoly and then decided not to do
anything about it because of AI.
>> Yeah. So, between the time when we
shipped our Alphabet episode and here
with our Google AI episode or our uh
part two and part three for those who
prefer simpler naming schemes. Yeah,
there was a US versus Google antitrust
case. The judge first ruled that Google
was a monopoly in internet search and
then did not come up with any material
remedies. I mean there are some, but I
would call them immaterial. They did not
need to spin off Chrome and they did not
need to stop sending tens of billions of
dollars to Apple and others. In other
words, yes, Google's a monopoly and the
cost of doing anything about that would
have too many downstream consequences on
the ecosystem. So, we're just going to
let them keep doing what they're doing.
And one of the reasons that the judge
cited of why they weren't going to
really take these actions is because of
the race in AI. That because tens of
billions of dollars of funding have gone
into companies like OpenAI and Anthropic
and Perplexity, Google essentially has
this new war to fight and we're going to
leave it to the free market to do its
thing where it creates viable
competition on its own and we're not
going to hamstring Google. Personally, I
think this argument is a little bit
silly. I mean, none of these AI
companies are generating net income, and
just because they've raised a huge
amount of money, it doesn't mean that
will last forever. They'll all burn
through their existing cash in a pretty
short period of time. And if the
spigotss ever dry up, Google doesn't
have any self-sustaining competition
right now, whether in their old search
business or in AI. It is all dependent
on people believing that the opportunity
is so large that they keep pouring tens
of billions of dollars into these
competitors. Yeah, plenty of other folks
have made the sort of glib comment, but
there's merit to it of, hey, as
flat-footed as Google was when Chat GPT
happened, if the outcome of this is they
avoid a Microsoft level distraction and
damage to their business from a US
federal court monopoly judgment. Worth
it.
>> Well, there's a funny meme here that you
could draw. You know that meme of
someone pushing the domino and it
knocking over some big wall later.
>> Yeah.
>> There's the domino of Ilia leaving
Google to start OpenAI and the
downstream effect is Google is not
broken up.
>> Yeah. Right. Exactly.
>> It actually saves Google.
>> It's totally wild.
>> Totally wild.
>> All right. So, here's the business
today. Okay, over the last 12 months,
Google has generated $370
billion
in revenue. On the earnings side,
they've generated
140 billion over the last 12 months,
which is more profit than any other tech
company. And the only company in the
world with more earnings is Saudi
Aramco. Let's not forget Google is the
best business ever. And we also made the
point at the end of the Alphabet
episode, even in the midst of all of
this AI era and everything that's
happened over the last 10 years, the
last 5 years, Google's core business has
continued to grow 5x since the end of
our alphabet episode in 2015 2016.
>> Yeah. Market cap. Google surged past
their old peak of two trillion and just
hit that three trillion mark earlier
this month. They're the fourth most
valuable company in the world behind
Nvidia, Microsoft, and Apple. It's just
crazy. On their balance sheet, I
actually think this is pretty
interesting. I normally don't look at
balance sheet as a part of this
exercise, but it's useful. And here's
why. In this case, they have 95 billion
in cash and marketable securities. And I
was about to stop there and make the
point, wow, look how much cash and
resources they have.
>> I'm actually surprised it's not more. So
it used to be 140 billion in 2021 and
over the last four years they've
massively shift from this mode of
accumulating cash to deploying cash and
a huge part of that has been the capex
of the AI data center buildout. So
they're very much playing offense in the
way that Meta, Microsoft and Amazon are
in deploying that capex. But the thing
that I can't quite figure out is the
largest part of that was actually
buybacks and they started paying a
dividend. So if you're not a finance
person, the way to read into that is
yes, we still need a lot of cash for
investing in the future of AI and data
centers, but we still actually had way
more cash than we needed and we decided
to distribute that to shareholders.
>> Yeah,
>> that's crazy.
>> Best business of all time, right? That
illustrates what a crazy business their
core search ads business is. If they're
saying, "The most capital intense race
in business history is happening right
now. We intend to win it."
>> Yeah.
>> And we have tons of extra cash lying
around on top of what we think plus a
safety cushion for investing in that
capex race.
>> Yeah.
>> Yes.
>> Wow. So there are two businesses that
are worth looking at here. One is Gemini
to try to figure out what's happening
there and two is a brief history of
Google cloud. I want to tell you the
cloud numbers today but it's probably
worth actually understanding how did we
get here on cloud.
>> Yep.
>> First on Gemini because this is Google
and they have I think the most
obfuscated financials of any of the
companies we've studied. They anger me
the most in being able to hide the ball
in their financial statements. Of
course, we don't know Gemini specific
revenue. What we do know is there are
over 150 million paying subscribers to
the Google 1 bundle. Most of that is on
a very low tier. It's on like the $5 a
month, $10 a month. The AI stuff kicks
in on the $20 a month tier where you get
the premium AI features, but I think
that's a very small fraction of the 150
million today.
>> Yeah, I think that's what I'm on.
>> But two things to note. One, it's
growing quickly. that 150 million is
growing almost 50% year-over-year. But
two is Google has a subscription bundle
that 150 million people are subscribed
to. And so I've kind of had it in my
head that AI doesn't have a future as a
business model that people pay money for
that it has to be ad supported like
search.
>> But hey, that's not nothing. That's like
a
>> that's almost half of America.
>> I mean, how many subscribers does
Netflix have?
>> Netflix is in the hundreds of millions.
Yeah,
>> there are realcaled
consumer subscription services. I owe
this insight to Shashir Moroto. We
chatted actually last night cuz I name
dropped him on the last episode and then
he heard it and so we reached out, we
talked and that's made me do a 180. I
used to think if you're going to charge
for something your total addressable
market shrunk by 90 to 99%. But he kind
of has this point that if you build a
really compelling bundle and Google has
the digital assets to build a compelling
bundle.
>> Oh my goodness. YouTube Premium, NFL
Sunday Ticket.
>> Yes. Stuff in the Play Store, YouTube
Music, all the Google One storage stuff.
They could put AI in that bundle and
figure out through clever bundle
economics a way to make a paid AI
product that actually reaches a huge
number of paying subscribers. Totally.
>> So, we really can't figure out how much
money Gemini makes right now. Probably
not profitable anyway. So, what's the
point of even analyzing it?
>> Yeah. But, okay, tell us the cloud
story. So, we intentionally did not
include cloud in our Alphabet episode.
>> Google part two effectively.
>> Google part two. Yes. because it is a
new product and now very successful one
within Google that was started during
the same time period as all the other
ones that we talked about during Google
part two. But it's so strategic for AI.
Yes, it is a lot more strategic now in
hindsight than it looked when they
launched it. So just quick background on
it, it started as Google App Engine. It
was a way in 2008 for people to quickly
spin up a backend for a web or soon
after a mobile app. It was a platform as
a service. So you had to do things in
this very narrow googly way. It was very
opinionated. You had to use this SDK.
You had to write it in Python or Java.
You had to deploy exactly the way they
wanted you to deploy. It was not a thing
where they would say, "Hey developer,
you can do anything you want. Just use
our infrastructure." It was opinionated.
super different than what AWS was doing
at the time and what they're still doing
today, which the whole world eventually
realized was right, which is cloud
should be infrastructure as a service.
Even Microsoft pivoted Azure to this
reasonably quickly where it was like,
you want some storage, we got storage
for you. You want a VM, we got a VM for
you. You want some compute, you want a
database,
>> we got you.
>> Fundamental building blocks. So
eventually, Google launches their own
infrastructure as a service in 2012.
Took four years. They launched Google
Compute Engine that they would later
rebrand Google Cloud Platform. That's
the name of the business today. The
knock on Google is that they could never
figure out how to possibly interface
with the enterprise. Their core
business, they made really great
products for people to use, that they
loved polishing, they made them all as
self-s serve as possible, and then the
way they made money was from
advertisers. And let's be honest,
there's no other choice but to use
Google search,
>> right? it didn't necessarily need to
have a great enterprise experience for
their advertising customers because they
were going to come anyway,
>> right? And so they've got this self-s
serve experience. Meanwhile, the cloud
is a knife fight. These are commodities
>> all about the enterprise.
>> It's the lowest possible price and it's
all about enterprise relationships and
clever ways to bundle and being able to
deliver a full solution.
>> You say solution, I hear gross margin.
>> Yes. But yes, so Google out of their
natural habitat in this domain
>> and early on they didn't want to give
away any crown jewels. They viewed their
infrastructure as this is our secret
thing. We don't want to let anybody else
use it. And the best software tools that
we have on it that we've written for
ourselves like big table or borg how we
run Google or disbelief. These are not
services that we're making available on
Google cloud.
>> Yeah. These are competitive advantages.
>> Yes. And then they hired the former
president of Oracle, Thomas Kurrion.
>> Yes. And everything kind of changed. So
2017, 2 years before he comes in, they
had $4 billion in revenue 10 years into
running this business. 2018 is their
first very clever strategic decision.
They launched Kubernetes. The big
insight here is if we make it more
portable for developers to move their
applications to other clouds, the world
is kind of wanting multicloud here,
>> right? We're the third place player. We
don't have anything to lose.
>> Yes.
>> So we can offer this tool a kind of
counterposition against AWS and Azure.
>> We shift the developer paradigm to use
these containers. They orchestrate on
our platform and then you know we have a
great service to manage it for you. It
was very smart. So this kind of becomes
one of the pillars of their strategy is
you want multicloud, we're going to make
that easy and you can sure choose AWS or
Azure 2. It's going to be great. So
David, as you said, the former president
of Oracle, Thomas Currion, is hired in
late 2018. You couldn't ask for a better
person who understands the needs of the
enterprise than the former president of
Oracle. This shows up in revenue growth
right away. In 2020, they crossed 13
billion in revenue, which was nearly
tripling in three years. They hired like
10,000 people into the go to market
organization. I'm not exaggerating that.
And that's on a base of 150 people when
he came in, most of which were seated in
California, not regionally distributed
throughout the world. The funniest thing
is Google kind of was a cloud company
all along. They had the best engineers
building this amazing infrastructure,
>> right? They had the products, they had
the infrastructure, they just didn't
have the go to market organization,
>> right? And the productization was all
like googly. It was like for us, for
engineers. They didn't really build
things that let enterprises build the
way that they wanted to build. This all
changes. 2022, they hit 26 billion in
revenue. 2023, they're like a real
viable third cloud. They also flipped to
profitability in 2023. And today,
they're over $50 billion in annual
revenue run rate. It's growing 30%
year-over-year. They're the fastest
growing of the major cloud providers, 5x
in five years. And it's really three
things. It's finding religion on how to
actually serve the enterprise. It's
leaning into this multi cloud strategy
and actually giving enterprise
developers what they want. And three, AI
has been such a good tailwind for all
hyperscalers because these workloads all
need to run in the cloud because it's
giant amounts of data and giant amount
of compute and energy. But in Google
Cloud, you can use TPUs, which they make
a ton of, and everyone else is
desperately begging Nvidia for
allocations to GPUs. So, if you're
willing to not use CUDA and build on
Google Stack, they have an abundant
amount of TPUs for you.
>> This is why we saved cloud for this
episode. There are two aspects of Google
cloud that I don't think they forsaw
back when they started the business with
App Engine but are hugely strategically
important to Google today. One is just
simply that cloud is the distribution
mechanism for AI. So if you want to play
an AI today, you either need to have a
great application, a great model, a
great ship or a great cloud. Google is
trying to have all four of those.
>> Yes,
>> there is no other company that has I
think more than one.
>> I think that's the right call. Think
about the big AI players. Nvidia
>> chips
>> kind of has a cloud but not really. They
just have chips and they the best chips
and the chips everyone wants but chips.
And then you just look around the rest
of the big tech companies. Meta right
now only an application. They're
completely out of the race for the
frontier models at the moment. We'll see
what they're hiring spree yields. You
look at Amazon infrastructure, they have
application maybe. I don't actually know
if Amazon.com I'm sure it benefits from
LLMs in a bunch of ways.
>> Mainly it's cloud.
>> Yes, cloud and cloud leader. Microsoft
>> cloud.
>> It's just cloud, right? They make some
models, but
>> I mean they've got applications, but
yeah, cloud
>> cloud. Apple
>> nothing. Nothing.
>> AMD just chips.
>> Yep. Open AAI model.
>> Anthropic model.
>> Yep.
>> These companies don't have their own
data centers. They are like making noise
about making their own chips, but not
really and certainly not at scale.
Google has scale data center, scale
chips, scale usage of model. I mean,
even just from google.com queries now on
AI overviews
>> and scale applications.
>> Yes. Yeah, they have all of the pillars
of AI and I don't think any other
company has more than one
>> and they have the very most net income
dollars to lose.
>> Right? So then there's the chip side
specifically of this. If Google didn't
have a cloud, it wouldn't have a chip
business. It would only have an internal
chip business. The only way that
external companies, users, developers,
model researchers could use TPUs would
be if Google had a cloud to deliver them
because there's no way in hell that
Amazon or Microsoft are going to put
TPUs from Google in their clouds.
>> We'll see.
>> We'll see. I guess
>> I think within a year it might happen.
There are rumors already that some
NeoClouds in the coming months are going
to have TPUs.
>> M interesting. Nothing announced, but
TPUs are likely going to be available in
Neocloud soon, which is an interesting
thing. Why would Google do that? Are
they trying to build an NVIDIA type
business where they make money selling
chips? I don't think so. I think it's
more that they're trying to build an
ecosystem around their chips the way
that CUDA does. And you're only going to
credibly be able to do that if your
chips are accessible in anywhere that
someone's running their existing
workloads.
>> Yep. be very interesting if it happens.
And you know, look, you may be right.
Maybe there will be TPUs in AWS or Azure
someday,
but I don't think they would have been
able to start there. If Google didn't
have a cloud and there weren't any way
for developers to use TPUs and start
wanting TPUs,
would Amazon or Microsoft be like, "Ah,
you know, all right, Google, we'll take
some of your TPUs even though no
developer out there uses them." Right.
>> All right. Well, with that, let's move
into analysis. I think we need to do
Bull and Bear on this one.
>> You have to this time.
>> Got to bring that back.
>> For these episodes in the present, it
seems like we need to paint the possible
futures.
>> Yes. Bringing back bull and bear. I love
it. Then we'll do playbook powers
quintessence. Bring it home.
>> Perfect. All right. So, here's my set of
bull cases. Google has distribution to
basically all humans as the front door
to the internet. They can funnel that
however they want. You've seen it with
AI overviews. You've seen it with AI
mode. Even though lots of people use
chat GBD for lots of things, Google's
traffic, I assume, is still essentially
an all-time high and it's a default
behavior.
>> Yep. Powerful. So that is a bet on
implementation that Google figures out
how to execute and build a great
business out of AI, but it is still
theirs to lose.
>> Yeah. And they've got a viable product.
It's not clear to me that Gemini is any
worse than OpenAI or Anthropics
products.
>> No, I completely agree. This is a value
creation, value capture thing. The value
creation is there in spades. The value
capture mechanism is still TBD.
>> Yeah. Google's old value capture
mechanism is one of the best in history.
So that's the issue at hand. Let's not
get confused that it's not like a good
exper it's a great experience.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So we've talked
about the fact that Google has all the
capabilities to win an AI and it's not
even close. Foundational model chips
hyperscaler all this with self-
sustaining funding. I mean that's the
other crazy thing is you look at the
clouds have self-sustaining funding.
Nvidia has self-sustaining funding. None
of the model makers have self-sustaining
funding, so they're all dependent on
external capital.
>> Yeah. Google is the only model maker who
has self-sustaining funding.
>> Yes. Isn't that crazy?
>> Yeah.
>> Basically, all the other large scale
usage foundational model companies are
effectively startups.
>> Yes.
>> And Google's is funded by a money funnel
so large that they're giving extra
dollars back to shareholders for fun.
>> Yeah.
>> Again, we're in the bullc case.
>> Well, when you put it that way. Yeah, a
thing we didn't mention, Google has
incredibly fat pipes connecting all of
their data centers. After the dot crash
in 2000, Google bought all that dark
fiber for pennies on the dollar, and
they've been activating it over the last
decade. They now have their own private
backhole network between data centers.
No one has infrastructure like this.
>> Yep.
>> Not to mention that serves YouTube.
They're fat pipes,
>> which in and of itself is its own
bullcase for Google in the future.
>> That's a great point.
>> Yeah, Ben Thompson had a big article
about this yesterday at the time of
recording.
>> Yeah, that was like a mega bullc case
that Ben Thompson published this week
that it was an interesting point. A
textbased internet is kind of the old
internet. It's the first instantiation
of the internet because we didn't have
much bandwidth. The user experience that
is actually compelling is
>> video,
>> high resolution video everywhere all the
time.
>> We already live in the YouTube internet,
>> right? And not only can they train
models on really the only scale source
of UGC media across long form and short
form, but they also have that as the
number two search engine, this massive
destination site. So they previewed
things like you'll be able to buy AI
labeled or AI determined things that
show up in videos. And if they wanted
to, they could just go label every
single product in every single video and
make it all instantly shoppable. Doesn't
require any human work to do it. They
could just do it and then run their
standard ads model on it. That was a
mind expanding piece that Ben published
yesterday or I guess if you're listening
to this a few weeks ago about that. And
then there's also all the video AI
applications that they've been building
like Flow and VO. What is that going to
do for generating videos for YouTube
that will increase engagement and add
dollars for YouTube?
>> Yep.
>> Going to work real well.
>> Yep. They still have an insane talent
bench. Even though, you know, they've
bled talent here and there and lost
people. They have also shown they're
willing to spend billions for the right
people and retain them. unit economics.
Let's talk about unit economics of
chips. Everyone is paying Nvidia 75 80%
gross margins implying something like a
four or 5x markup on what it costs to
make the chips. A lot of people refer to
this as the Jensen tax or the Nvidia
tax. Uh you can call it that, you can
call it good business, you can call it
pricing power, you could call it
scarcity of supply, whatever you want.
But that is true. Anyone who doesn't
make their own chips is paying a giant
giant premium to Nvidia. Google has to
still pay some margin to their chip
hardware partner Broadcom that handles a
lot of the work to actually make the
chip interface with TSMC. I have heard
that Broadcom has something like a 50%
margin when working with Google on the
TPU versus Nvidia's 80%. But that's
still a huge difference to play with. A
50% gross margin from your supplier or
an 80% gross margin from your supplier
is the difference between a 2x markup
and a 5x markup.
>> Yeah, I guess that's right.
>> When you frame it that way, it's
actually a giant difference of the
impact to your cost. So you might wonder
appropriately, well, are chips actually
the big part of the cost of like the
total cost of ownership of running one
of these data centers or training one of
these models? Chips are the main driver
of the cost. They depreciate very
quickly. I mean, this is at best a
five-year depreciation because of how
fast we are pushing the limits of what
we can do with chips, the needs of next
generation models, how fast TSMC is able
to produce.
>> Yeah. I mean, even that is ambitious,
right? If you think you're going to get
5 years of depreciation on AI chips,
five years ago, we were still two years
away from chat GPT,
>> right? Or think about what Jensen said
at um we were at GTC this year. He was
talking about Blackwell and he said
something about Hopper and he was like,
"Eh, you don't want Hopper." My sales
guys are going to hate me, but like you
really don't want Hopper at this point.
I mean, these were the H100s. This was
the hot chip just when we were doing our
most recent NVIDIA episode.
>> Yes. Things move quickly.
>> Yes. So I've seen estimates that over
half the cost of running an AI data
center is the chips and the associated
depreciation. The human cost that R&D is
actually a pretty high amount because
hiring these AI researchers and all the
software engineering is meaningful. Call
it 25 to 33%.
The power is actually a very small part.
It's like 2 to 6%. So when you're
thinking about the economics of doing
what Google's doing, it's actually
incredibly sensitive to how much margin
are you paying your supplier in the
chips because it's the biggest cost
driver of the whole thing.
>> Mhm.
>> So I was sanity checking some of this
with Gavin Baker who's the partner at a
trades management to prep for this
episode. He's like a great public
equities investor who's studied the
space for a long time. We actually
interviewed him at the Nvidia GTC
pregame show and he pointed out normally
like in historical technology eras it
hasn't been that important to be the
lowcost producer. Google didn't win
because they were the lowest cost search
engine. Apple didn't win because they
were the lowest cost. You know, that's
not what makes people win. But this era
might actually be different because
these AI companies don't have 80%
margins the way that we're used to in
the technology business or at least in
the software business at best these AI
companies look like 50% gross margins.
So Google being definitively the lowcost
provider of tokens because they operate
all their own infrastructure and because
they have access to low markup hardware.
It actually makes a giant difference and
might mean that they are the winner in
producing tokens for the world.
>> Very compelling bill case there.
>> That's a weirdly winding analytical
bullcase, but it's kind of the if you
want to really get down to it, they
produce tokens.
>> Yep. I've got one more bullet point to
add to the bulcase for Google here.
Everything that we talked about in part
two, the Alphabet episode, all of the
other products within Google, Gmail,
Maps, Docs, Chrome, Android, that is all
personalized data about you that Google
owns that they can use to create
personalized AI products for you that
nobody else has.
>> Another great point. So really the
question to close out the bullc case is
is AI a good business to be in compared
to search. Search is a great business to
be in. So far AI is not. But in the
abstract again we're in the bullcase. So
I'll give you this. It should be. With
traditional web search you type in two
to three words. That's the average query
length. And I was talking to Bill Gross
and he pointed out that in AI chat
you're often typing 20 plus words. So
there should be an ad model that emerges
and ad rates should actually be
dramatically higher cuz you have perfect
precision,
>> right? You have even more intent.
>> Yes, you know the crap out of what that
user wants. So you can really decide to
target them with the ad or not. And AI
should be very good at targeting with
the ad. So it's all about figuring out
the user interface, the mix of paid
versus not, exactly what this ad model
is. But in theory, even though we don't
really know what the product looks like
now, it should actually lend itself very
well to monetization.
>> Yep.
>> And since AI is such a amazing
transformative experience, all these
interactions that were happening in the
real world or weren't happening at all
like answers to questions and being on a
time spent is now happening in these AI
chats. So, it seems like the pie is
actually bigger for digital interactions
than it was in the search era. So again,
monetization should kind of increase
because the pi increases there.
>> Yep.
>> And then you've got the bullcase of
Whimo could be its own Googleiz
business.
>> I was just thinking that yeah, that's
scoping all of this to a replacement to
the search market. Whimo and potentially
other applications of AI beyond the
traditional search market could add to
that,
>> right? And then there's the like galaxy
brain bullcase, which is if Google
actually creates AGI, none of this even
matters anymore. And like of course it's
the most valuable thing.
>> That feels out of the scope for an
acquired episode.
>> It's disconnected.
Yes, agree. Barecase. So far, this is
all fun to talk about, but then the
product shape of AI has not lent itself
well to ads. So despite more value
creation, there's way less value
capture. Google makes something like
$400ish dollars per user per year just
based on some napkin math in the US.
That's a free service that everyone uses
and they make $400ish dollars a year.
Who's going to pay $400 a year for
access to AI? It's a very thin slice of
the population.
>> Some people certainly will, but not
every person in America.
>> Some people will pay 10 million, but
right. So if you're only looking at the
game on the field today, I don't see the
immediate path to value capture. And
think about when Google launched in
1998, it was only 2 years before they
had AdWords. They figured out an amazing
value capture mechanism instantly, very
quickly. Yep. Another bare case. Think
back to Google launch in 1998. It was
immediately obviously the superior
product. Yes,
>> definitely not the case today.
>> No, there's four, five great products.
>> Google's dedicated AI offerings in
chatbot was initially the immediately
obviously inferior product and now it's
arguably on par with several others,
right? They own 90% of the search
market. I don't know what they own of
the AI market, but it ain't 90%. Is it
25%? I don't know. But at steady state,
it probably will be something like 25,
maybe up to 50%. But this is going to be
a market with several big players in it.
So even if they monetized each user, as
great as they monetize it in search,
they're just going to own way less of
them.
>> Yep. Or at least it certainly seems that
way right now.
>> Yes. AI might take away the majority of
the use cases of search. And even if it
doesn't, I bet it takes away a lot of
the highest value ones.
>> Mhm.
>> If I'm planning a trip, I'm planning
that in AI. I'm no longer searching on
Google for things that are going to land
Expedia ads in my face.
>> Or health, another huge vertical.
>> Hey, I think I might have something that
reminds me of misotheloma. Is it that or
not,
>> right?
>> Oh, where are you going to put the
lawyer ads? Maybe you put them there.
Maybe it's just an ad product thing, but
these are very high value
>> queries,
>> former searches that those feel like
some of the first things that are
getting siphoned off to AI.
>> Yep.
>> Any other bare cases? I think the only
other bare case I would add is that they
have the added challenge now of being
the incumbent this time around and
people and the ecosystem isn't
necessarily rooting for them in the way
that people were rooting for Google when
they were a startup and in the way that
people were still rooting for Google in
the mobile transition. I think the
startups have more of the hearts and
minds these days,
>> right? So, I don't think that's
quantifiable, but is just going to make
it all a little harder path to row this
time around.
>> Yep. You're right. They had this
incredible PR and public love tailwind
the first time around.
>> Yep. And part of that's systemic, too.
Like all of tech and all of big tech is
just generally more out of favor with
the country and the world now than it
was 10 or 15 years ago.
>> There's more important. It's just big
infrastructure. It's not underdogs
anymore.
>> Yep. And that affects the open AIS and
the anthropics and the startups too, but
I think to a lesser degree.
>> Yeah, they had to start behaving like
big tech companies really early in their
life compared to Google. I mean, Google
gave a Playboy interview during their
quiet period of their IPO. Times have
changed.
>> Well, I mean, given all the drama at
OpenAI, I I don't know that I
characterize them as acting like a
mature company.
>> Fair. Fair
>> company, entity, whatever they are.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. But point taken.
>> Well, I worked most of my playbook into
the story itself. So, you want to do
power?
>> Yeah. Great. Let's move on and do power.
Hamilton Helmer's seven powers analysis
of Google here in the AI era. And the
seven powers are scale economies,
network economies, counterpositioning,
switching costs, branding, quartered
resource, and process power. And the
question is which of these enables a
business to achieve persistent
differential returns? What entitles them
to make greater profits than their
nearest competitor sustainably? Normally
we would do this on the business all up.
I think for this episode we should try
to scope it to AI products.
>> Yes, agreed. usage of Gemini AI mode and
AI overviews versus the competitive set
of anthropic open AI, perplexity, Grock,
meta AI,
>> etc. Scale economies for sure. Even more
so in AI than traditionally in tech.
>> Yeah, they're just way better. I mean,
look, they're amoritizing the cost of
model training across every Google
search. I'm sure it's some super
distilled down model that's actually
happening for AI overviews, but think
about how many inference tokens are
generated for the other model companies
and how many inference tokens are
generated by Gemini. They just are
amortizing that fixed training cost over
a giant giant amount of inference that I
saw some crazy chart. We'll send it out
to email subscribers. In April of 24,
Google was processing 10 trillion tokens
across all their surfaces. In April of
25, that was almost 500 trillion. Wow.
>> That's a 50x increase in one year of the
number of tokens that they're vending
out across Google services through
inference. And between April of 25 and
June 25, it went from a little under 500
trillion to a little under one
quadrillion tokens. Technically 980
trillion, but they are now, cuz it's
later in the summer, definitely sending
out maybe even multiple quadrillion
tokens.
>> Wow.
>> Wow. So among all the other obvious
scale economies things of amortizing all
the costs of their hardware, they are
amortizing the cost of training runs
over a massive amount of value creation.
>> Yeah, scale economies must be the
biggest one.
>> I find switching costs to be relatively
low. I use Gemini for some stuff then
it's really easy to switch away. That
probably stops being the case when it's
personal AI to the point that you're
talking about integrating with your
calendar and your mail and all that
stuff. Yeah, the switching costs have
not really come out yet in AI products,
although I expect they will.
>> Yes, they have within the enterprise for
sure.
>> Yep.
>> Network economies. I don't think if
anyone else is a Gemini user, it makes
it better for me because they are
sucking up the whole internet whether
anyone's participating or not.
>> Yep, agree. I'm sure AI companies will
develop network economies over time. I
can think of ways it could work, but
yeah, right now, no. And arguably for
the foundational model companies, can't
think of obvious reasons right now.
Where does Hamilton put distribution?
Because that's a thing that they have
right now that no one else has despite
ChatGBT having the Kleenex brand. Google
distribution is still unbelievable. I
don't Is that a cornered resource?
>> Cornered resource, I guess. Yeah,
>> definitely have that.
>> Yeah, Google search is a cornered
resource for sure.
>> Certainly don't have counterpositioning.
They're getting counterpositioned.
>> Yeah.
>> I don't think they have process power
unless they were like coming up with the
next transformer reliably, but I don't
think we're necessarily seeing that.
There's great research being done at a
bunch of different labs. Branding they
have
>> Yeah, branding is a funny one, right?
Well, I was going to say it's a little
bit to my barecase point about they're
the incumbent.
>> It cuts both ways, but I think it's net
positive.
>> Yeah, probably. For most people, they
trust Google. Yeah, they probably don't
trust these who knows AI companies, but
I trust Google. I bet that's actually
stronger than any downsides as long as
they're willing to still release stuff
on the cutting edge.
>> Yep.
>> So, to sum it up, it's scale economies
is the biggest one. It's branding and
it's a cornered resource
>> and potential for switching costs in the
future. Yep. Sounds right to me.
>> But it's telling that it's not all of
them. You know, in search it was like
very obviously all of them or most of
them.
>> Yep. Quite telling. Well, I'll tell you,
after hours and hours spending multiple
months learning about this company, my
quintessence when I boil it all down is
just that this is the most fascinating
example of the innovators dilemma ever.
I mean, Larry and Sergey control the
company. They have been quoted
repeatedly saying that they would rather
go bankrupt than lose at AI. Will they
really? If AI isn't as good a business
as search, and it kind of feels like of
course it will be. Of course, it has to
be. It's just because of the sheer
amount of value creation. But if it's
not, and they're choosing between two
outcomes, one is fulfilling our mission
of organizing the world's information
and making it universally accessible and
useful and having the most profitable
tech company in the world. Which one
wins?
Cuz if it's just the mission, they
should be way more aggressive on AI mode
than they are right now. And full flip
over to Gemini. It's a really hard
needle to thread. I'm actually very
impressed at how they're managing to
currently protect the core franchise,
but it might be one of these things
where it's being eroded away at the
foundation in a way that just somehow
isn't showing up in the financials yet.
I don't know.
>> Yep. I totally agree. And in fact,
perhaps influenced by you, I think my
quintessence is a version of that, too.
I think if you look at all the big tech
companies, Google, as unlikely as it
seems, given how things started, is
probably doing the best job of trying to
thread the needle with AI right now. And
that is incredibly commendable to Sundar
and their leadership. They are making
hard decisions like we're unifying deep
mind and brain. We're consolidating and
standardizing on one model and we're
going to ship this stuff real fast while
at the same time not making rash
decisions.
>> It's hard. Rapid but not rash, you know.
>> Yes. And obviously we're still in early
innings of all this going on and we'll
see in 10 years where it all ends up.
Yeah. Being tasked with being the
steward of a mission and the steward of
a franchise with public company
shareholders is a hard dual mission and
Sundar and the company is handling it
remarkably well especially given where
they were 5 years ago.
>> Yep. And I think this will be one of the
most fascinating examples in history to
watch it play out.
>> Totally agree. Well, thus concludes our
Google series for now.
>> Yes. All right, let's do some carveouts.
>> All right, let's do some carveouts.
Well, first off, we have a uh very, very
fun announcement to share with you all.
The NFL called us.
>> We're going to the Super Bowl, baby.
>> Acquired is going to the Super Bowl.
This is so cool.
>> It's the craziest thing ever.
>> The NFL is hosting a innovation summit
the week of the Super Bowl, the Friday
before Super Bowl Sunday. The Super Bowl
is going to be in San Francisco this
year in February. And so it's only
natural coming back to San Francisco
with the Super Bowl that the NFL should
do an innovation summit.
>> Yep.
>> And we're going to host it.
>> That's right. So, the Friday before
there's going to be some great onstage
interviews and programming. Most of you,
you know, we can't fit millions of
people in a tiny auditorium in San
Francisco the week of the Super Bowl
when every other venue has tons of
stuff, too. So, there will be an
opportunity to watch that streaming
online. And as we get closer to that
date in February, we will make sure that
you all know a way that you can tune in
and watch the uh MCing, interviewing,
and festivities at hand. Super Bowl
week.
>> It's going to be an incredible,
incredible day leading up to an
incredible Sunday.
>> Yes. Well, speaking of sport, my carve
out is I finally went and saw F1. It is
great. I highly recommend anyone go see
it, whether you're an F1 fan or not. It
is just beautiful cinema.
>> Amazing. Did you see it in the theater
or
>> I did see in the theater. Yeah.
>> Wow.
>> I unfortunately missed the IMAX window,
but it was great. It was my first time
being in a movie theater in a while. And
whether you watch it at home or whether
you watch it in the theater, I recommend
the theater. But it's going to be a
great surround sound experience wherever
you are.
>> I haven't been to the movie theater
since the era tour.
>> Ah,
>> which I think is just more about the
current state of my family life with two
young children.
>> Yes. My second one, some of you are
going to laugh, is the Travel Pro
suitcase.
>> Ah, this is the brand that pilots and
flight attendants use, right?
>> Maybe. I think I've seen some of them
use it. Usually they use something
higherend like a Briggs and Riley or a
Tumi or, you know, Travel Pro is not the
most high-end suitcase, but I bought two
really big ones for some international
travel that we were doing with my
2-year-old toddler. And I must say,
they're robust. The wheels glide really
well. They're really smooth. They have
all the features you would want. They're
soft shell, so you can like really jam
it full of stuff, but it's also a thick
amount of protection. So, even if you do
jam it full of stuff, it's probably not
going to break. This is approximately
the most budget suitcase you could buy.
I mean, I'm looking at the big honken
international check bag version. It's
$416 on Amazon right now. I've seen it
cheaper. They have great sales pretty
often. Everything about this suitcase
checked lots of boxes for me and I
completely thought I would be the person
buying the Ramoa suitcase or the
something very high-end and this is just
perfect. So, I think I may be investing
in more Travel Pro suitcases.
>> More Travel Pro. Nice. Nice. Well, I
mean, hey, look, for family travel, you
don't want nice stuff.
>> Yeah. I mean, I bought it thinking like
I'll just get something crappy for this
trip, but it's been great. I don't
understand why I wouldn't have a full
lineup of Travel Pro gear. So
>> amazing.
>> This is my like budget pick gone right
that I highly recommend for all of you.
>> I love how uh Acquired is turning into
the wire cutter here.
>> That's it for me today.
>> Great. All right. I have two carveouts.
I have one carve out and then I have a
update in my ongoing Google carveout
saga. But first, my actual carveout.
It is the Glue Guys podcast.
>> Oh, it's great. Those guys are awesome.
So great. Our buddy Robbie Gupta,
partner at Sequoia, and his buddies
Shane Badier, the former basketball
player, and Alex Smith, the former
quarterback for the 49ers and the Kansas
City Chiefs and the Redskins. Their
dynamic is so great. They have so much
fun. Half of their episodes, like us,
are just them, and then half of their
episodes are with guests. Ben and I, we
went on it a couple weeks ago. That was
really fun. When we were on it, we were
talking about this dynamic of some
episodes do better than others and
pressure for episodes and whatnot. And
the guys brought up this interview they
did with a guy named Wright Thompson.
And they said like, "Look, this is an
episode. It's got like 5,000 listens.
Nobody's listened to it. It's so good."
And the mentality that we have about it
is not that we're embarrassed that
nobody listened to it. It's that we feel
sorry for the people who have not yet
listened to it because it's so good. I
was like that is the way to think about
>> that's great
>> your episodes.
>> So here you are. You're giving everyone
the gift of
>> I'm giving everyone the gift because I
then I was like all right well I got to
go listen to this episode. Ray Thompson
I didn't know anything about him before
I probably read his work in magazines
over the years without realizing it.
>> He's the coolest dude.
>> He has the same accent as Bill Gurley.
So listening to him sounds like
listening to If Bill Gurley instead of
being a VC only wrote about sports and
basically dedicated his whole life to
understanding the mentality and
psychology of athletes and coaches. It's
so cool. It's so cool. It's a great
episode. Highly, highly, highly
recommend.
>> All right. Legitimately, I'm queuing
that up right now.
>> Great. That's my carve out. And then my
ongoing family video gaming saga in
Google part one. I said I was debating
between the Switch 2 and the Steam Deck.
>> That's right. First, you got the Steam
Deck because you decided your daughter
actually wasn't old enough to play video
games with you, so you just got the
thing for you.
>> The update was I went with the Steam
Deck for that reason. I thought if it's
just for me, it would be more ideal. I
have an update.
>> You also got a Switch.
>> Uh, no, not yet.
>> Okay.
>> But the most incredible thing happened.
My daughter noticed this device that
appeared in our house that dad plays
every now and then. And we were on
vacation and I was playing the Steam
Deck and she was like, "What's that?"
Well, let me tell you.
>> And I was playing I've been playing this
really cool indie old school style RPG
called Sea of Stars. It's like a chrono
trigger style Super Nintendo style RPG.
I'm playing it and my daughter comes up.
She's like, "Can I watch you play?" And
I'm like, "Hell yeah, you can watch me
play. I get to play video games and you
sit here and snuggle with me and like,
you know, amazing.
>> I get to play video games and call it
parenting."
>> Then it gets even better. Probably like
two weeks ago, we're playing. And she's
like, "Hey, Dad, can I try?" I'm like,
"Absolutely, you can try." I hand her
the Steam Deck and it was the most
incredible experience, one of the most
incredible experiences I've had as a
parent because she doesn't know how to
play video games and I'm watching her
learn how to like use a joystick and hit
the button.
>> Supervised learning. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Supervised learning. I'm telling her
what to do and then within two or three
nights she got it. She doesn't even know
how to read yet, but she figured it out
and like I'm watching in real time. And
so now the last week it's turned to
mostly she's playing and I'm like
helping her asking questions of like
well what do you think you should do
here? Like you know should you go here?
I think this is the goal. I think this
is where it's so so fun. So I think I
might actually pretty soon her
birthday's coming up end up getting a
Switch so that we can play, you know,
together on the Switch, right?
>> But unintentionally the Steam Deck was
the gateway drug for my soon tobe
four-year-old daughter. That's awesome.
There you go. Parent of the year right
there. Getting to play video games and
Oh, honey. I got it. I'll I'll take it.
>> Oh, yeah. I got it. I got it.
>> All right. Well, listeners, we have lots
of thank yous to make for this episode.
We talked to so many folks who were
instrumental in helping put it together.
First, a thank you to our partners this
season. JP Morgan Payments, trusted,
reliable payments infrastructure for
your business, no matter the scale.
That's JPorggan.com/acquired.
Sentry, the best way to monitor for
issues in your software and fix them
before users get mad. That's
centry.io/acquired.
Workos, the best way to make your app
enterprise ready, starting with single
sign on in just a few lines of code.
Workos.com. And Shopify, the best place
to sell online, whether you're a large
enterprise or just a founder with a big
idea. Shopify.com/acquired.
The links are all in the show notes. As
always, all of our sources for this
episode are linked in the show notes.
Yes. First, Steven Levy at Wired and his
great classic book on Google in the
Plex, which has been an amazing source
for all three of our Google episodes.
Definitely go buy the book and read
that. Also to Parm Olsen at Bloomberg
for her book Supremacy about Deep Mind
and Open AI, which was a main source for
this episode. And I guess also to Kade
Mets, right,
>> for Genius Makers. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Great book. Our research thank yous. Max
Ross, Liz Reed, Josh Woodward, Greg
Curado, Sebastian Thrun, Anna Patterson,
Brett Taylor, Clay Bavor, Dennis Asabis,
Thomas Kurrion, Sundar Pachai. A special
thank you to Nick Fox, who is the only
person we spoke to for all three Google
episodes for research. We got the hat
trick.
>> Yeah. to Arvin Navaratnam at Worldly
Partners for his great write up on
Alphabet linked in the show notes to
Jonathan Ross original team member on
the TPU and today the founder and CEO of
Grock that's Grock with a Q making chips
for inference to the Whimo folks
Dimmitri Doglov and Suzanne Fyion to
Gavin Baker from Atrades management to
MG Seagler writer at spy glassass MG is
just one of my favorite technology
writers and pundits
>> OG techrunch writer That's right to Ben
Idolen for being a great thought partner
on this episode and his excellent recent
episode on the Step Change podcast on
the history of data centers. I highly
recommend it if you haven't listened
already. It's only episode three for
them of the entire podcast and they're
already getting I don't know 30 40,000
listens on it. I mean, this thing is
taking off.
>> Amazing, dude. That's way better than we
were doing on episode three.
>> It's way better than we were doing. And
if you like Acquired, you will love the
Step Change podcast. And Ben is a dear
friend. So, highly recommend checking it
out. To Cororai Kovaktalu from the
DeepMind team building the core Gemini
models to Shashir Maroda, the CEO of
Grammarly, formerly ran product at
YouTube. To Jim Gao, the CEO of Fedra
and former DeepMind team member, Chathan
Pudigonta, partner at Benchmark. Dwarash
Patel for helping me think through some
of my conclusions to draw. And to Brian
Lawrence from Oakcliffe Capital for
helping me think about the economics of
AI data centers. If you like this
episode, go check out our episode on the
early history of Google and the 2010s
with our Alphabet episode and of course
our series on Microsoft and Nvidia.
After this episode, go check out ACQ2
with Toby Lutka, the founder and CEO of
Shopify. And come talk about it with us
in the Slack at acquire.fm/Slack.
And don't forget our 10th anniversary
celebration of acquired. We are going to
do a open Zoom call, an LP call just
like the days of your with anyone.
Listeners, come join us on Zoom. It's
going to be on October 20th at 400 p.m.
Pacific time. Details are in the show
notes.
>> And with that, listeners, we'll see you
next time.
>> We'll see you next time.
>> Who got the truth?
Is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Who got
the truth now? Huh?
[Music]